 

 

Making dryland research matter 

Addressing the need for European-African partnership for Ethiopia and Niger 

--- 


 

 

Dry Land 


 

 

Commissioner: Judith Ann Francis and Yodit Kebede (Partner 8 - CTA) 

Coach: Sara Eeman 

Expert: Nico de Ridder 

Team members: Yemisrach Abebaw, Veraniek Geerts, Mereseit Hailu, Koen Leuveld, Catharina Lont, 
Nasreldin Mohemed, Mariëlle Mulder 

Date: 24-June-2009 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright © 2009 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or 
by any means, without the prior consent of the authors. 

 

 

This report (product) is produced by students of Wageningen University as part of their MSc-programme. 

It is not an official publication of Wageningen University or Wageningen UR and the content herein does not 
represent any formal position or representation by Wageningen University. 


Foreword & Acknowledgements 

This project was undertaken for the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation EU-ACP (CTA), a 
partner in the Agricultural Innovation in Dryland Africa (AIDA)[1] project, by a multi-disciplinary team of graduate 
students of Wageningen University. The report was prepared as part of the Academic Consultancy Training 
course. The goal of the course is to gain experience in applying academic skills in a small consultancy team. 
That is not to say that the team considered this to be just a training exercise. Every team member was highly 
motivated to make this report something that not only we, but also our commissioner and Wageningen 
University can be proud of. 

We could not have performed this assignment without the support of a large number of people. We would very 
much like to extend our gratitude to each of these persons: Judith Ann Francis and Yodit Kebede, CTA. Their 
confidence in the outcome of this assignment was heart-warming, and a real boost to the team; our process 
coach, Sara Eeman, who made the difficult task of working in a multi-cultural, multi-disciplinary team an 
enjoyable and productive experience; the experts assigned to our team for this course; Tjeerd-Jan Stomph and 
Nico de Ridder: their input and critical feedback really helped us to produce results; Marloes van der Kamp for 
evaluating our proposal; Marjan Wink for her communication training sessions; and all the experts in the field 
who were eager to meet us and provide invaluable input: Dr. Todd Crane, Prof. Dr. Ir. Han van Dijk, Prof. Dr. Ir. 
Ken Giller, Dr. Ir. Jan de Graaf, Dr. Ir. Tjeerd-Jan Stomph, Prof. Dr. Ir. Akke van der Zijpp, Dr. Ir. André de 
Jager, Dr. Chris Reij, Wim Goris, Djibo Hamidou, Dr. Wellington Ekaya, Dr. Fetien Abay and Tesfay Belay. 
Without the input of these experts we would have been overwhelmed by the amount of issues facing African 
dryland farmers. 

We hope reading this paper will be as pleasant as writing it was, 

ACT Group 545, 

Yemisrach Abebaw 

Veraniek Geerts 

Mereseit Hailu 

Koen Leuveld 

Catharina Lont 

Nasreldin Mohemed 

Mariëlle Mulder 

 

 

 

[1] The AIDA project (Project No- 2006-043863) falls under the Specific Scientific International Scientific Cooperation Activities (INCO) of the 
EU and is co-ordinated by the French Agricultural Research Center for International development (CIRAD). Project partners are the 
AGRHYMET regional centre (Niger), CIRAD (France), CTA (The Netherlands), FARA (Ghana), PRI Wageningen University and Research 
centre (The Netherlands), RUFORUM (Uganda), University of Malawi Bunda College and the University of Nairobi (Kenya). 

 

 


Table of Content 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... 1 
1. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................... 2 
2. METHODS ................................................................................................................................. 5 
3. EXPLORATION OF EXISTING POLICIES ......................................................................................... 6 
3.1. INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRES ................................................................................................... 6 
3.2. GOVERNMENT POLICY ...................................................................................................................... 9 
3.4 NGOS AND DONORS ...................................................................................................................... 15 
4. REFLECTION ............................................................................................................................. 18 
4.1 REFLECTION ON THE PAST ................................................................................................................ 18 
4.2 COMPARISON OF GOVERNMENT POLICIES ............................................................................................ 18 
4.3 EVALUATION OF RESEARCH STRATEGIES .............................................................................................. 18 
4.4 THE APPROACH OF OTHER ORGANIZATIONS ......................................................................................... 20 
4.5 FARMERS’ PERCEPTIONS .................................................................................................................. 20 
5. QUESTION 1: HOW TO BRING THE KNOWLEDGE AT FIELD LEVEL INTO RESEARCH 
PROGRAMMES? ............................................................................................................................. 21 
5.1 POLICY CONTEXT AND INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN ................................................................................... 21 
5.2 EXPERIENCES OF EXPERTS................................................................................................................. 23 
6 QUESTION 2: IS THERE A NEED FOR HARMONIZATION OF POLICIES AND INTERVENTIONS IN 
THE FIELD? .................................................................................................................................... 25 
6.1 INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................. 25 
6.2 SUBJECTS FOR HARMONIZATION ........................................................................................................ 25 
7 QUESTION 3: HOW TO SET UP A MORE CONCERTED NETWORK BETWEEN POLICIES, RESEARCH 
PROGRAMMES AND INTERVENTIONS IN THE FIELD? ...................................................................... 27 
7.1 SOME EXAMPLES OF EXISTING NETWORKS ........................................................................................... 28 
7.2 WHAT SHOULD A NETWORK LOOK LIKE? ............................................................................................. 28 
7.3 RISKS .......................................................................................................................................... 29 
8 CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................... 31 
9. DISCUSSION ............................................................................................................................. 32 
10. RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................................................... 33 
LIST OF ACRONYMS ........................................................................................................................ 34 
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 36 
ANNEX A ....................................................................................................................................... 41 
ANNEX B ................................................................................................................................................................ 50 
Executive summary 

Dryland Africa is faced with many challenges, like water shortage, food crisis, erosion, land degradation and 
desertification. Concerns exist on the contribution of research to the solution to these challenges: farmer 
knowledge might be underappreciated and duplication and contradiction might be present in the policies and 
interventions. In order to address these issues, the following questions are answered in this text: 

1. How to bring the knowledge at field level into research programmes? 


2. Is there a need for harmonization of policies and interventions in the field? 


3. How to set up a more concerted network between policies, research programmes and interventions in 
the field? 




These questions will be answered using literature research, analysis of policy documents, and interviews with 
experts. 

The policies of different actors are examined: International research organisations such as ICRISAT, ICARDA, 
ICRAF and ILRI; National government policies of Niger and Ethiopia; and several donors and NGOs such as 
DANIDA, USAID, GTZ, IFAD SOS Sahel and the Eden Foundation. It is argued that the level of farmer 
participation in dryland research is currently too low. Policy implementation is conducted in a top-down manner. 
Farmer concerns and perceptions are therefore not adequately fed into the research system. The fact that 
public funding is low exacerbates this fact, and preordains thorough cooperation between actors in order to use 
resources efficiently. 

The following answers to the questions are proposed: 

1: In order get farmer knowledge in research participative methodologies are needed. Although some progress 
is made in this, there is still a long way to go. 

2: Several policies affecting dryland farmers contradict. Land tenure policies are not always compatible with 
policy priorities regarding off-farm employment and farmer investment in soil and water conservation measures. 
Policy also often under-acknowledges the links between the different issues dryland farmers face. Focusing on 
one of these issues in isolation might be one of the causes of past dryland intervention. 

3: Networks of stakeholders are needed to provide an environment conducive to innovation and 
experimentation. These networks should combine actors operating at different levels, so the inherent tension 
between the need for locally specific innovations and region-wide solutions can be taken away. 

It is concluded that participatory methods are vital, in order to set a research agenda that addresses farmers’ 
concerns and needs. These methods should be supported by a network of supportive policies allowing the 
dissemination of knowledge and innovations. 

Some limitations were encountered during the writing of this report. Not all information on the topic could be 
addressed; either due to language difficulties, to documents simply being unavailable or people not responding 
to questionnaires. Policy documents of Ethiopia were so numerous, that a selection had to be made which to 
consider for this report. A further problem was that the team does not consist entirely of specialist in the field of 
dryland agriculture. There is therefore only a limited frame of reference in order to assess whether all crucial 
topics have been covered. 

Some recommendations for further research are to interview farmers, use specialist with proficiency in French, 
and to do more research on to how policies are implemented, rather than how they are worded in documents. 


1. Introduction 




While large parts of the scientific literature and popular debate depict agriculture in dryland Africa as failing, this 
is a one-sided depiction of a reality that is diverse and dynamic. For the past 40 years commentators have 
predicted food crisis in the drylands of the continent. However, despite difficult circumstances, the value of 
agricultural output has risen by 2.7% annually. However, in a region where population growth rates are among 
the highest in the world, this has not been enough to effect a rise in per capita food production (Haggblade et 
al., 2003). Several factors contribute to this; Africa’s soils are generally poor, rainfall is low while there is little 
scope for large scale irrigation, and the climate is very erratic (Haggblade et al., 2003). This makes it hard to 
copy the successes that have been made in for example irrigated rice, in Asia. 

 

This report aims to provide an overview of the research efforts currently underway in dryland Africa. The actors 
that engage in this research are very diverse; International research institutions, donor organizations, NGOs, 
national governments and their agricultural research systems all have their policies affecting this research. 
Farmers themselves also innovate and experiment with ways of coping with the difficulties of dryland 
agriculture. 

 

In order to keep the amount of policies studied manageable, the focus of this research will be on Niger 
(excluding irrigated areas) and the dryland regions of Ethiopia (Somali, Afar Tigray and parts of Amhara). Both 
provide interesting case studies, due to their experience with food crises. The fact the countries are located in 
different regions allows a comparison to be made. This will help in identifying what policies and interventions 
deserve replication, and which ones need to be altered. 

 

These two countries share a few characteristics; both rank near the bottom of the United Nations Development 
Fund’s Human Development Index (UNDP, 2008). Their economies are for a large part reliant on subsistence 
agriculture, and food security is a serious issue for both. However, for every $100 of agricultural output, the 
Nigerien government invested $0.17 in research in 2001, while the Ethiopian government did a little better at 
$0.43 (in 2000), however, this is still low compared to the average ratio of Africa, 0.85 (Stads et al., 2004; 
Beintema and Solomon, 2003). Figures 1 and 2 depict the development budgets allocated to agricultural 
research over a number of years. Here too, diverging trends between the two countries are apparent; while in 
Ethiopia budgets are steadily increasing, Niger’s show a sharp drop. The reasons for this drop are beyond the 
scope of this paper now, however, it is noted that this drop has been detrimental to agricultural research. 

 

 

 

Figure 1: Funding of Niger’s Agricultural research institute, INRAN. Notes: “Other” includes internally generated income, 
contributions from private enterprises, and non-identified sources of income. INRAN’s funding levels are lower than its 
expenditure levels because estimated salaries for expatriates are not included. (Source: IFPRI–ISNAR–CORAF/WECARD 
2002–03). 


 

 

Figure 2: Funding to Ethiopia’s agricultural research system. (Source: IFPRI–ISNAR– 

ASARECA 2001–02). 

One of the concerns this report aims to address is the way farmer knowledge is incorporated into research 
programmes. Research used to be very top down: research stations transferred their results to extension 
workers, who pass it on to farmers. Given the agricultural budgets described above, researchers have been 
spread so thinly, that it has proved impossible for them to be fully aware of what is going on “on the ground”. 
This has meant that the “transfer-of-technology” model does not deliver the innovation required. Nevertheless, 
science is seen as the primary source of innovation. This is unfortunate, as experimentation and innovation by 
farmers has great potential to increase food security in Africa (Kaboré and Reij, 2004; Reij and Smaling, 2008). 
Agroforestry and soil-conservation techniques that are labour- rather than cash-intensive are being adopted 
and adapted by local communities once their effectiveness has become clear. A “regreening” has been 
described for millions of hectares in Niger (CP Reij 2009, pers. comm., 3 June). 

 

A second concern this report addresses is that the policies of the multitude of actors described above might not 
always coincide, and sometimes contradict. It is argued that in order to provide an environment that is 
conducive to innovation and experimentation, different stakeholders need to be engaged, and multi-disciplinary 
co-operation is needed (Clark, 2001; Hall et al., 2001). 

 

In order to address these two issues, the following questions are answered in this report: 

4. How to bring the knowledge at field level into research programmes? 


5. Is there a need for harmonization of policies and interventions in the field? 


6. How to set up a more concerted network between policies, research programmes and interventions in 
the field? 




 


This report is organized as follows: Chapter two details the methods used for this report. Chapter three will give 
an overview of the actors, and their policies. Chapter four consists of a critical reflection of these policies. 
Answers to the questions posed above are provided in chapter five. The concluding three chapters consist of a 
discussion, conclusions and recommendations for further research. 


2. Methods 




This report relies on three types of information; policy documents of stakeholders, scientific literature and expert 
interviews. 

 

The actors whose policies were scrutinized include the national governments of Niger and Ethiopia; their 
national agricultural research institutes; international agricultural research institutes, ICRISAT, ICARDA, ICRAF 
and ILRI; Donor organizations, EU, USAID, DANIDA, IFAD and GTZ; and NGOs, such as SOS Sahel, 
TerrAfrica, Eden foundation and FARM-Africa. In order to assess the policies of these actors, their websites 
were searched for relevant documents, such as strategy papers, annual reports, and policy reports. The focus 
while searching for these was on dryland issues. After these were defined very broadly, some restrictions had 
to be made, as practically all government policies affect dryland people in one way or another. Therefore, when 
available, the policies (e.g. from national governments) examined, address agricultural research, agricultural 
technology development, extension and land tenure. 

 

The assessment of scientific literature served two purposes: the first was to provide context and critical 
reflection on the policies found, in order to get an independent opinion of the policies and interventions of actors 
in the field; a second aim was to assess different theories on innovation, and whether the assumptions 
underlying the policies were shared in the scientific community. To start, CTA gave us a collection of articles 
that provided at least an introduction to dryland research. 

 

To interview experts, key persons of different disciplines were selected (with suggestions from CTA) with 
experience in research in dryland Africa, preferably Niger and/or Ethiopia. Questions were asked regarding the 
issues affecting the drylands, the gap between field and research and how to close this gap. Because we 
selected experts with experience in Africa, several stayed actually in Africa during the time of this study, and 
could not be met face-to-face. These people were either contacted by phone, or by an e-mail questionnaire. 
The summaries of the interviews and answers to the questionnaires can be found in Annex A and B. 

 

From Wageningen University the following resource persons are interviewed, 

Dr. Ir. Todd Crane, Technology & Agrarian Development; 

Prof. Dr. Ir. Han van Dijk, Law & Governance in Africa; 

Prof. Dr. Ir. Ken Giller, Plant Production Systems; 

Dr. Ir. Jan de Graaf, Land Degradation and Development; 

Prof. Dr. Ir. Akke van der Zijpp, Animal Production Systems. 

The following three resource persons from outside Wageningen University are interviewed: 

Dr. Ir. André de Jager, LEI, Agricultural Economics Research Institute, Market & Networks; 

Mr. Chris Reij, Centre for International Cooperation, Vrije Universiteit; 

Wim Goris, Agri-ProFocus (partnership of Dutch donor agencies, credit institutions, companies, training and 
knowledge institutions). 

 

CTA selected 11 key persons to send a questionnaire to, 4 people provided answers: Djibo Hamidou 
(AGRYMET), Dr. Wellington Ekaya (RUFORUM), Dr. Fetien Abay (Mekelle University, Ethiopia) and Tesfay 
Belay (Tigray Agricultural Research Institute, Mekelle, Ethiopia). 

 

Our expert to supervise the content of this project was Dr. Nico de Ridder of Plant Production Systems. Two 
meetings were organized about the content, and he is one of the examiners of this report. Finally, one of our 
commissioners, Yodit Kebede attended two of our meetings to give feedback and input. 


3. Exploration of existing policies 




This chapter gives an overview of the policies of important actors in dryland Africa. First the international 
research centres are examined. This is followed by an overview of the policies of the Ethiopian and Nigerien 
governments, focusing on the policies most relevant for dryland issues. The national agricultural research 
institutes of Ethiopia and Niger are located in the government part because their policies must fit with those of 
the government. The final part contains an overview of the policies of a selection of NGOs that operate in 
drylands of Ethiopia and Niger. 

3.1. International Research Centres 




Starting at the international level there are 15 research centres that belong to the Consultative Group on 
International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). The CGIAR members all have research mandates related to 
specific commodities and geographical areas. Four research institutes that are most relevant for the dryland 
areas in Ethiopia and/or Niger have been selected. The main focus of their research is outlined here. First, a 
short description of the International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) is presented, 
followed by the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF), the International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), and lastly the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI). 

3.1.1. International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) 




For developing countries in general ICARDA works on the improvement of barley, lentil, and faba bean. 
Specifically for the dry areas they are concerned with on-farm management of water, improvement of nutrition 
and productivity of small ruminants (sheep and goats), and rehabilitation and management of rangelands. In 
the Central and West Asia and North Africa (CWANA) region, ICARDA is engaged in the improvement of 
durum and bread wheat, chickpea, pasture and forage legumes and farming systems (ICARDA 2009a). 

 

ICARDA’s research is concentrated into four areas: (a) integrated gene management, (b) production systems, 
(c) natural resource management, and (d) social, economic and policy research. In its Medium Term plan 
(2008-2010) these are focused into eight projects (ICARDA, 2007): 

Project 1: Conservation of Agrobiodiversity in Dry Areas 

Project 2: ICARDA-CIMMYT Wheat Improvement Program for CWANA 

Project 3: Barley Improvement 

Project 4: Food Legume Improvement 

Project 5: Strengthening National Seed Systems in Dry Areas 

Project 6: Diversification and Sustainable Intensification of Production Systems in Dry Areas 

Project 7: Improving Water and Land Management in Dry Areas 

Project 8: Poverty and Livelihood Analysis and Impact Assessment in Dry Areas 

 

For the Nile Valley and Sub Saharan Africa region (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Yemen) the 
incorporation of wheat leaf rust resistant genes into high yielding wheat cultivars is mentioned as key 
achievement. ICARDA also mentions the sharing between countries of resistant races of wilt and root-rot 
disease in food legume crops, as a key achievement. Their current emphasis for the Nile Valley and Sub 
Saharan Africa region is on the development of germplasm that is tolerant/resistant to the major biotic and 
abiotic stresses. Abiotic stresses, especially drought and salinity, will receive more attention in the future 
(ICARDA 2009b). 

 

ICARDA’s new strategy (for 2008-2010) shows several shifts in focus, among others, towards ‘more emphasis 
on socio-economic research to strengthen community and institutional frameworks, and develop policy options 
for the successful implementation of new technologies’. Another point in the strategy shift focuses on ‘enabling 
farmers to move from subsistence agriculture to market-oriented production and improve their livelihoods’. 
Partnerships with the private sector are explicitly mentioned (ICARDA, 2007a). 


Participatory approach 

ICARDA states ‘frameworks and methodologies for participatory and community-based research are also being 
developed and implemented in partnership with NARS to enhance the impact on rural livelihoods’. As ICARDA 
works with National Agricultural Research Systems, the NARS are called upon to institutionalize ‘participatory 
and community-based approaches’. ICARDA indicates this will enhance ‘technology adoption by end users and 
empower rural communities and enhance household social capital on a wider scale’. More impact for more 
farmers will be reached if ‘technology relevance is enhanced and its uptake will be increased’ (ICARDA, 
2007b). This suggests that obtaining more knowledge from research in the field is seen as a way to improve the 
adoption of ICARDA’s technologies. 

3.1.2. International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) 




ICRISAT focuses its research on five crops: pigeonpea, chickpea, pearl millet, groundnut and sweet sorghum. 
‘They are mandated to breed better for poor farmers in poor soils: dry, waterlogged, infertile, or too costly to 
irrigate’ (Hilario, 2007:13). Hence, ICRISAT develops improved crops, that are for instance virus resistant, 
drought resistant, more nutritious or meet quality standards needed for export (Dar, 2007:9). Trying to remedy 
under-nutrition ICRISAT wants to breed higher nutrient levels into their mandate crops, especially the dryland 
cereals sorghum and millet. 

 

ICRISAT uses an integrated genetic and natural resource management (IGNRM) strategy to ‘improve the well-
being of the poor with equity, multidisciplinarity, sustainability and community participation’. IGNRM ‘maximizes 
the synergies of biotechnology, plant breeding, agronomy, agro-ecosystems and social sciences with people 
empowerment at its core’. In addition, ICRISAT identifies the need for ‘thematic-regional integration, multi-
stakeholdership and multi-level partnerships in mobilizing science and technology for the poor’ (ICRISAT, 
2006). Hilario (2007: 39, 40) quotes ICRISAT’s Director General William Dar saying in crop science decisions 
ought to be made ‘taking into account natural resource fragility, community vulnerability, risk profiles, asset 
resilience, market options’. 

 

ICRISAT believes the drylands are favoured for cultivation because of sunshine, fewer pests, easier terrain and 
large underground or river water resources (Dar, 2007:11). 

Participatory Approach 

ICRISAT states it learns from farmers through village level socio-economic studies, land use surveys and 
farmer field schools. ‘We also involve farmers in our plant breeding research to learn about the plant traits that 
they value most’ (Dar, 2007:27). Co-learning with farmers and research on how they innovate is referred to as 
building social and knowledge capital. ICRISAT states this also ‘helps us improve institutions and cooperation 
mechanisms such as community self-help and joint credit associations, micro-credit from socially-conscious 
lenders, market opportunities that diversify risk and affordable insurance against severe drought’ (Dar, 
2007:28). 

 

Learning from the fact that farmers decrease risks by diversifying within and between crops, ICRISAT ‘helps 
farmers expand their agro biodiversity and market opportunities’. This is done by ‘increasing the number of high 
value crops, trees, shrubs, and herbs available for cultivation’ (Dar, 2007:30) 

Private sector Involvement 

According to ICRISAT private-public partnerships are being mainstreamed in agricultural research: ‘We are 
witnessing a gradual convergence of the public sector's pro-poor development goals and the private sector's 
commercial interests’ (ICRISAT, 2006). ICRISAT has been trying to convince the private sector to become 
partners with scientists and government in running a biofuel industry with small farmers as active partners and 
direct beneficiaries (Hilario, 2007). 

Markets 

ICRISAT feels ‘research-for-development institutions including policy and technical initiatives should help 
agriculturalists capture higher-value markets that are emerging as the drylands join the global trend towards 
urbanization’. Dryland farmers instead of foreign exporters could service the urban centres where raising 


income is increasing the demand for fruit and vegetables. Vegetables do require more care and investment 
than grain crops. 

For its West and Central African strategy the role of the market is explicitly mentioned. ‘A primary driver for 
ICRISAT's strategy in WCA is to spur market demand. We will create incentives and opportunities for the poor 
to grow their way out of poverty through market-orientated production and value addition, in addition to 
ensuring their own food security’ (ICRISAT, 2006). 

 

Specific programmes 

The Sahelian Eco Farm is led by ICRISAT and includes partners like the NGO SOS Sahel and (inter)national 
research centres. The Sahelian Eco-Farm model consists of nitrogen binding acacia trees, fertilizer, water 
harvesting and diversifying into ‘high-value specialty crops such as fruit trees, vegetables, fibrous grasses, 
herbs and medicinals’ (Dar, 2007:12). For this post-harvesting, transport and marketing also have to be 
developed. This can be done by farmer cooperation, private sector partnerships and enabling policies: a holistic 
systems approach is needed, according to ICRISAT. 

 

The Desert Margins Program (DMP) is implemented by the United Nations Environment Programme and 
executed by ICRISAT, many partners are involved. The DMP strategy is to analyze the root causes of dryland 
degradation in Africa, document indigenous knowledge of sustainable practices, develop more sustainable 
practices, help governments design policies that encourage sustainable practices, enhance African institutional 
capacities for land degradation research and outreach, facilitate the sharing of technologies, knowledge and 
information and forecast possible climate change scenarios for land use planning (ICRISAT, 2004). ICRISAT 
states that through the DMP it confronts the myths that fertilizer is too risky and crop diversification challenges 
the myth that only low value grain suits dryland (Dar, 2007:18). 

 

Biofuels are an important focus, for ICRISAT this centres around sweet sorghum and jatropha. Sweet sorghum 
is targeted to provide raw material to make ethanol. ICRISAT is exploring the genetic variability in Jatropha ‘to 
find higher-oil types to increase its income earning potential’ (Dar, 2007:25). Noting the danger that biofuel 
crops can replace food crops, ICRISAT argues that the demand for sorghum as a food crop has been 
decreasing in India because of urban preferences and subsidies for wheat and rice. Sweet sorghum is a variety 
different from sorghum for grain (N de Ridder 2009, pers. comm., 18 June). ICRISAT states it can help 
transition sorghum from a food to a fuel crop, thereby increasing income for sorghum producers (Dar, 2007:25). 

3.1.3. International Center for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) 




ICRAF, nowadays known as the World Agroforestry Center, is an autonomous, non-profit research organization 
whose vision is a rural transformation in the developing world by integrating trees with agriculture. Trees have a 
major role in the improvement of food security, nutrition, income, health, shelter and energy resources for 
people and environmental sustainability of dryland regions (A van der Zijpp 2009, pers. comm., 25 June). 
ICRAF works in six eco-regions across Sub-Saharan Africa, South and Southeast Asia, and Latin America 
(ICRAF, 2008). 

 

Maximizing on-farm productivity of trees and agroforestry systems as well as improving tree product marketing 
for smallholders are major research priorities of ICRAF. The research outputs of this institute are used by 

Box 1 Food shortage in Niger 

According to ICRISAT the food shortage in Niger (famine of 2005) was caused by poor soil 
fertility, which is seen as the major food production constraint. Malnourished plants do not 
develop a proper root system and therefore cannot take up water when the rains come, water is 
wasted. A tiny dose of fertilizer is the answer. Adoption of this strategy is prevented by lacking 
access to fertilizer, access to credit, insufficient flows of information and training to farmers and 
inadequate policies. These hurdles can be overcome by forming farmer cooperatives. Farmers 
store grains together, receive loans with the grain as collateral and sell the grain when the price 
is high (Dar, 2007:9). 


national and local policymakers, cooperatives, farmer organizations, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), 
National Agricultural Research Institutes (NARI), other members of the research community and government 
extension services (ICRAF, 2008). Most of ICRAF’s research is done in collaboration with national and local 
institutes. They work with national agricultural research systems (NARS), universities, NGOs, micro-finance 
institutions, community based organizations, private businesses and farmer associations (ICRAF, 2008). 

 

3.1.3.1 Participatory Approach 

 

ICRAF has one project that focuses on West African dryland. This project uses an ecosystem approach to 
restore West African drylands and improve rural livelihoods through agroforestry. The implementation of this 
project is built on national capacity in ecosystems approaches to dryland management. National capacity 
building is facilitated through joint implementation of science by advanced scientific institutions with national 
research and extension staff, natural resource managers and farmers (ICRAF, 2006). 

3.1.4. International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) 




ILRI focuses on livestock research, poverty reduction and sustainable development. It operates in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America, with offices in East and West Africa, South and Southeast Asia, Central America and China 
(ILRI, 2008). The strategy of ILRI is to focus on securing the assets of the poor people, improving smallholder 
and pastoral productivity and increasing market participation of farmers and pastoralists (ILRI, 2009). 

 

According to the strategy of ILRI to 2010, it has four main research themes that address issues related to 
livestock: 

 

.. Facilitate innovation: adapting and delivering of technology and information. This research theme 
focuses on the development of improved technology, transfer of improved technology to farmers and/ 
or pastoralists and bringing information from farmers or other beneficiaries of their research. 


.. Improving market access: opportunities and threats from globalization and the ‘Livestock Revolution’. 
The main objective of this theme is to facilitate the livestock related market participation of producers 
and to increase the product value at farmers hand by improving post-harvest handling. 


.. Securing assets: better livelihoods through the application of biotechnology. ILRI is committed to do 
research on biotechnology for the development of vaccines and mapping genetic traits, which secure 
livestock assets and helps conventional breeding research. 


.. Sustaining lands and livelihoods: improved human and environmental health. It emphasizes the 
positive and negative effects of livestock and their products on the health of people and environment. 




 

Participatory Approach 

ILRI facilitates the adaptation of the Farmer Field School (FFS) concept to improve livestock systems in 
developing countries (ILRI, 2009). FFSs are “schools without walls’’ and their general principle is sharing 
agricultural knowledge and information among farmers, researchers and extension agents, all being experts in 
these schools (Asiabaka, 2002). In an FFS farmers learn practically on the field, they organize their own 
meetings and extension officers facilitate the learning process. Recently 20 Farmer Field Schools for livestock 
have started in Kenya assisted by the International Livestock Research Institute. In Uganda, Tanzania and 
Gambia the FFSs are in the planning stage (ILRI, 2009). 

3.2. Government Policy 




This section contains two main parts. The first gives an overview of the government policies relevant for dryland 
regions, first for Ethiopia and subsequently for Niger. The second part describes the policies of the national 
research institutes, first the Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research and secondly the National Agricultural 
Research Institute of Niger. While operating semi-autonomously, their policies fit with the general policy of the 
government. 

3.2.1. Ethiopia 




Ethiopia’s economy depends heavily on agriculture; the general policy is called ‘Agriculture Development Led 
Industrialization’ (ADLI). For the implementation of ADLI different policies are developed, some of the policies 


that are most relevant for dryland issues are outlined here: research policy, rural and agricultural development 
policy and land policy. 

Research policy 

There is a long history of research by research institutions and higher education. The emphasis was on doing 
research to support the education of students, therefore there was less attention to research in the field. 
However, until recent times they addressed only crop production in areas having high production potential and 
on state owned farms. Dryland and pastoralist areas were overlooked until 1999 (ICARDA, 1999). Current 
research is starting to address these areas. 

Rural and Agricultural Development policy 

Ethiopia’s rural development policy addresses the contribution of agriculture to food security and general 
economic development. For this report the focus is on the agricultural research related aspects: starting with a 
summary of the policy, strategies specifically for dryland areas and the strategy in pastoral areas. 

Summary of the policies 

“Rural agriculture and development strategy is a development strategy which enables to save capital and utilize 
large amounts of human power and land” (Ministry of Information, 2001). The major reason why the rural and 
agriculture–centred development strategy is vital for the country is that it creates favourable conditions for the 
development of trade and industry. The policy enables the country to promote rapid and sustainable economic 
development through continuous improvements in technology and capital accumulation. Also it creates the 
possibilities to improve Ethiopia’s position in international relations and enhance benefits from it (ibid.). 

 

To implement the policy different strategies were developed. One of these is to preserve, register and utilize the 
endogenous knowledge in agricultural practices. It can be used as a base for development. The agricultural 
knowledge and skills of farmers are obtained from experiences inherited from their ancestors. They are used to 
adapt to the changing environment. Another strategy is to select the best traditional agricultural methods and 
disseminate them to other farmers. 

 

Next to traditional methods, farmer’s education and training with modern agricultural technology and techniques 
is a basic issue in the government strategy. Intensive work is required to educate farmers and implement new 
technologies, since it is difficult to implement new technologies when, for instance, farmers are unable to read 
the accompanying instruction manuals. 

 

In order to improve their agricultural skills and production capacity, illiterate farmers are trained through 
extension services by using demonstration fields. The experience within the country is combined with 
experiences from other countries that are relevant to the specific agro-ecological situation. The government 
wants to fully utilize the capacity of illiterate farmers, and put in maximum effort to educate the next generation 
farmers (ibid.). 

 

To educate the next generation primary schools need to be constructed. In addition, farmer training centers 
(FTCs) are needed throughout the country. FTCs are important for the provision of agricultural training, 
extension services, and information and as permanent centers of exhibitions. Occupational level agricultural 
colleges, like technical and vocational training (TVT) centers play an important role in the general capacity 
building of the work force involved in agriculture. For each Kebele (mid-level administrative unit, comprising 
twenty to twenty-five villages), the Ministry of Agriculture assigns three graduates of TVT colleges to provide 
services to farmers. Per Kebele one graduate is assigned to crops, one is assigned to livestock and another to 
natural resource management (ibid.). They provide extension and consultancy service to uneducated farmers 
and train educated rural youth at the kebele’s demonstration sites. (T Belay 2009, pers. comm., 5 June; 
Ministry of Information, 2001). 

 

Beyond capacity building at all levels of human labour involved in agricultural activities, the generation, 
multiplication and diversification of technology is another strategic approach. The Rural and Agricultural 
Development policy states that improved technologies should be site specific for different agro-ecological 
circumstances. Therefore, agricultural research being conducted and the technologies being generated should 


be based on the existing tangible problems of the farmers. Researchers must also take into account the 
detailed works in the production chain, from the beginning of production to the point of supplying outputs to the 
market (Ministry of Information, 2001). 

 

According to the Rural and Agricultural Development Policy, research needs highly skilled and educated 
researchers and large amounts of capital to reach the targets mentioned above. It will take time, however, the 
country can not afford to wait until the requirements of capacity of researchers and budgets are fulfilled. 
Therefore, the policy states the necessity of searching for and selecting exotic technologies which are suited to 
the countries’ situation. They should also develop new technologies relevant to the agro-ecological 
circumstances. Research results reach farmers in different ways, for instance by written notes, seminars and 
demonstration fields, depending on the farmers’ level of education and current skills. Dissemination of 
technologies is done by extension service agents with close supervision of extension professionals. Moreover, 
close linkages between the research and extension systems are the main issue to reach the required goals 
(ibid.). 

 

Educating the agricultural workforce that generates new technologies and/or improves existing technologies, by 
itself is not the only road to success. Multiplication of the generated technology is equally important. For this the 
involvement of relevant actors, selected farmers, private investors and/or state owned enterprises are 
necessary, depending on the type of technology. The government should generate, test and transfer 
technologies to farmers. The multiplication aspect of improved varieties should be handled by selected farmers. 
State owned enterprises and/or private investors should handle the multiplication of technologies (ibid.). 

 

All stated strategies are a general guide for all agro-ecology, but developing specific strategies for every agro-
ecological zone is also necessary. Due to the fact that the country’s agro-ecology is so diverse and it needs 
diverse solutions to address specific problems. 

 

In drought prone areas the main issue is insuring food security. To be food secure, working in agriculture is not 
the only solution. Diversifying income-generation into non-agricultural activities to buy food is an alternative 
way; however, this may not be a solution for all people who suffer from food insecurity. The major opportunity is 
in agricultural activities. To be effectively food secure in these areas the focus is on improvement of water 
utilization, strengthening protection of natural resources and sustainable improvement in agricultural 
technologies. However, “it takes time, so the short term solution is disaster prevention in parallel with 
acceleration of development by different strategies in settlement, protection of natural resources conservation 
and livestock resources” (ibid.). 

Strategies developed for dryland areas 

The government wants people to resettle from the drylands into low land areas with high production potential. 
This strategy needs the consent and involvement of settlers for its implementation. The government has started 
to construct the infrastructure that is required in resettlement areas immediately like health centres, education 
and roads (ibid.). 

 

Drylands are not only known for inadequate and erratic rainfall, they are also known for their severely degraded 
natural resources, deforestation, soil erosion and also improper cultivation of sloping areas. The degradation 
and deforestation has resulted from improper land use and weather impacts. To resolve these problems 
rehabilitation measures that resolve short term and long term problems are required. For example, avoiding 
crop cultivation on sloping areas, making closures (for controlled grazing) and planting legume trees as a 
source of animal feed and fire woods in short term and conserve soil and water in long term result (ibid.). 

 

The government strategy states that in areas where crop production is not possible anymore people must 
change to livestock or poultry production. Changing the system requires supplementary activities like insuring 
market availability and encouraging private companies to supply feed for livestock. In addition, the government 
strategy mentions improving livestock breeds through the selection of domestic breeds in the country and 
neighbouring countries. This implies active improvement, not only importing improved exotic breeds. 

 


The result of improvements should be disseminated to producers. However, if animals do not get enough 
forage and feed they cannot demonstrate increases in terms of productivity and numbers. Therefore, the “local 
and national government should encourage factories and institutions that produce animal feed concentrates” 
(ibid.). Private organizations can play a great role in this respect. 

In order to reach the goals mentioned above, each actor must do their part and improve their activities 
continuously (ibid.; A de Jager 2009, pers. comm., 28 June). 

 

Next to this, the government strategy mentions measures for proper utilization of water need to be taken, by 
constructing dams and using different technologies like drip irrigation. These activities should be backed up by 
providing training, materials and credit access to construct dams and purchasing of equipments. In these areas 
extension agents must be able to give enough advice and technical support (Ministry of Information, 2001). 

Strategy in pastoralist areas 

Pastoralists are known for their movement from place to place to find drinking water and pastureland. Before 
trying to improve the animal husbandry technology of the area, the local practice must first be studied. A new 
technological package can thus build on the strong aspects of the local practices .The government policy 
encourages pastoralists in areas where underground water and arable land is available, to switch to irrigated 
crop production (ibid.). 

Land policy 

Ethiopia is one of the few countries in Africa that has not made significant changes in its basic land policy for 
over three decades; except for occasional land redistributions to accommodate the growing population 
(Gebreselassie, 2006). “Even though equity or social justice seems the major objective of the redistribution, it 
also demonstrates the loophole in the policy which allows local authorities to use the land policy as a political 
instrument” (Gebreselassie, 2006). 

 

Access to land is an important issue for the majority of Ethiopian people who depend on agricultural production 
for their income and subsistence (ibid.). Land is under the state ownership and the government has the right to 
redistribute land whenever they feel it is necessary. If farmers’ land is taken (for infrastructure or to lease to 
private investors) the invested capital and all improvements made on the land is compensated by the 
government or investors (Ministry of information 2001; Gebreselassie, 2006). The policy stipulates that since 
land belongs to the government, it cannot be sold, exchanged, or used as collateral (ibid.). 

 

The land policy discourages long term (rural to urban) migration to search for non-agricultural employment. 
Because farmers could lose ownership if land is left unfarmed for a season or rented for a long period. The land 
policy is a major reason why the majority of farmers operate farms that are too small to make them sustainable 
and profitable use of technologies (Gebreselassie, 2006). 

3.2.2 Niger 




The government of Niger has developed different policies to alleviate poverty and to improve food security. This 
section describes the research policy, poverty reduction policy and land rights. 

Research policy 

Research in Niger is divided among different research agencies, each with their own activities. INRAN’s 
(National Agricultural Research Institute of Niger) primary purpose is to contribute to the attainment of food 
security and rural development in Niger. Their research focus includes crops, agronomy, animal sciences, 
forestry, fisheries, and agro-ecological and environmental issues. It takes up most of the agricultural research 
staff and budget of the country (Stads, et al., 2004). The second government agency conducting agricultural 
research in Niger is the Directorate of Cattle Breeding Centers and Livestock Stations (CMB-SE).This 
organization is allocated one quarter of the agricultural research budget (ibid.). 

 

Four higher-education agencies conduct agricultural research and development activities in different faculties. 
The faculty of agriculture in Abdou Moumouni University (UAM) conducts applied research on vegetables, 
livestock, soil and water conservation, forestry, agricultural engineering and socio-economics. The remaining 
three higher-education agencies are the “Biology Department of the Faculty of Sciences, focusing on crops and 


natural resources; the Human Sciences Research Institute (IRSH), focusing on the socioeconomics of rural life 
in Niger; and the Radioisotopes Institute (IRI), focusing on nuclear research” (ibid.). The agricultural research 
agencies participate in collaborative work with regional and international research organizations (ibid.). 

Poverty Reduction Policy 

The general strategy of the Niger government is poverty reduction. The government considers degradation of 
natural resources and the modest-to-declining access to credit for the rural poor as the causes of rural poverty. 
Agricultural production has declined following low rainfall and the resulting reduction in cultivated acreage and 
crop yield (Office of Prime Minister, 2002). The government identifies underdevelopment of sectors and factors 
of production as the major barriers to rural development, which is the engine of the economy. The government 
has set as one of its strategies to include the society in identifying problems and their cause and set priorities. 
People of the whole country should participate in all levels of decision making in a bottom-up approach. The 
government discusses with the society to prioritize the major activities to reduce poverty. According to the 
government the country’s people have set food security, agriculture and livestock as the priorities in order to 
eradicate poverty (ibid.). 

 

On the basis of the priorities of the people, the government has defined its national priorities. It has attempted 
to deal with most of the concerns expressed by the communities, while focusing on desertification and 
environment, management of hydraulic resources, decentralization and opening up of remote areas (ibid.). The 
Nigerien government’s strategy is to focus on the agro-pastoralist and livestock sector because the largest part 
of the population (85%) lives in rural areas (ibid.). In addition to this, the strategy is accompanied by measures 
to fight desertification in order to preserve the productive land bases for agriculture, livestock and forest as well 
as to increase arable land and agricultural production. 

Land policy 

 

Niger has implemented different land tenure systems starting since the time of colonization. Currently, land is in 
state ownership, farmers have the use right, but this varies with the type of ownership. If the land is family 
owned or inherited from family they have the right to cultivate it for more than six years. Migrants coming to the 
area are allowed to own land for a minimum of six years, after that it is up to the local government whether or 
not the general ownership rights are prolonged (Neef, 2000). 

 

According to Todd Crane, in countries like Niger land rights are the biggest issue. In the past the land tenure 
systems were in the hands of farmers, while during the colonization it became government owned. Since then 
the government owns all non-farmed land. Because pastoralists live on ground where no farmers are present, 
they live on the grounds of the government. The villages of farmers are on lands of the farmers and so they 
have the right to expand their fields. Both farmers and herders try to apply pressure on the political system for 
the other to give up land. (T Crane, pers. comm., 4 June). 

3.3 National Agricultural Research Institutes 




The national agricultural research institutes’ programmes fall under government policy. They are semi-
autonomous and often work with the international research institutes, including the CGIAR institutes mentioned 
above. The Ethiopia Institute Agricultural Research is discussed first, followed by the National Agricultural 
Research Institute of Niger. 

3.3.1 Ethiopia Institute Agricultural Research (EIAR) 

EIAR was originally known as Ethiopian Agricultural Research Organization (EARO). It was established in 
1966, with a mandate to formulate a national policy for agricultural research and to implement the policy 
through coordinated research centres and programmers (AfDevInfo, 2008). It consists of five research centres 
and eight research directories and departments. Dryland agriculture research is one of EIAR’s research 
directories. Its goals are to reduce poverty and maintain food security, increase income opportunities and 
employment generation. Further goals are to have healthier and better nourished families, conserving natural 
resources, reduced pressure on fragile natural resources and people-centred policy for sustainable agricultural 
development (EIAR, 2009). The Research Extension Farmer Linkage Department is one of the research 


departments in EIAR that is used as a bridge to communicate between research, extension offices and farmers. 
In addition to this it has as a main responsibility to create favourable conditions for researchers, extension staff 
and farmers to participate in identifying researchable problems (AfDevInfo, 2008 ). 

 

Starting from the mid 1980s, various participatory approaches to research and extension were introduced in 
Ethiopia. However the impact was limited due to different factors (EIAR-OARI, 2007). Researchers in the 
Ethiopian Agricultural Research System (EARS) have started struggling with the concept of "farmer 
participation" in agricultural research for a long time (EIAR, 2008). In 1985 the Research Extension Liaison 
Committee (RELC) was formed at the national and zone levels and currently they are also being established at 
centre levels (Casas, et al, 1999). RELCs are an important forum for discussing and exchanging ideas on 
production constraints, research programmes, and research findings (Casas, et al, 1999). The committees 
make efforts to improve the linkage between researchers, extension agents and farmers. However the outcome 
is not satisfactory (Abera, 2008). Abera does not explain why, yet Hailu mentions the representation of farmers, 
especially that of women, is not adequate. Cultural factors as well as budget limitations (for travel etc.) can be 
an important cause. Lastly, top-down attitudes of researchers also take time to change (M Hailu 2009, pers. 
comm., 18 June). 

 

A new innovative approach known as Farmers Research Group (FRG) has been initiated at EIAR. In 2004 one 
large project commenced, which coordinated FRG in EARI. The aim of this project was enhancing farmer 
participation in agricultural research. It was financed by the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
(EIAR, 2008). The principle of FRG is to establish one group of interested farmers, researchers and 
development agents and share knowledge and information. This approach is assumed to be an entry point for 
client oriented research. It can also be considered the start of a turn away from seeing farmers as passive 
recipients, towards farmers being seen as active generators of new technologies (EIAR, 2008). 

 

In the past, most research centres of the National Agricultural Research System in Ethiopia were located in the 
major agro-ecological zones of the country. The arid and semi-arid zones, especially the north-western and 
northern drought-prone zones, were least addressed. Research centres are now being established on different 
sites that represent the dryland region of the country (Jijiga in the Somali region, Shiket in Afar region, Jinka in 
the southern region, Humera in Tigray region, Sekota in Amhara region and Yavello in Oromia region) (EIAR, 
2009). On the other hand, agroforestry and forestry research is addressed less in EARS (A van der Zijpp 2009, 
pers. comm., 25 May). In Ethiopia’s dryland areas there are many indigenous trees and land races that are 
used by farmers. Yet research does not consider this potential, which could be one important solution for 
dryland agricultural problems (F Abay 2009, pers. comm., 11 June). 

3.3.2 National Agricultural Research Institute of Niger (INRAN) 

National Agricultural Research Institute of Niger (INRAN) accounts for three-quarters of the country’s total 
agricultural research staff and close to 60 percent of agricultural research spending in 2001 (ASTI 2004). 
INRAN’s primary purpose is to contribute to the attainment of food security and rural development in Niger. 
INRAN’s research focus includes crops, agronomy, animal sciences, forestry, fisheries, and agro-ecological 
and environmental issues. These activities are carried out at four regional agricultural research centres based 
in Niamey, Kollo, Maradi, and Tahoua. Each centre oversees various research stations and units known as 
development support points (PAD) (AfDevInfo, 2008). Niger’s agricultural research agencies also participate in 
a significant amount of collaborative research nationally, regionally and internationally. INRAN collaborates with 
international agencies like the Institute of Research for Development (IRD, France), International Crops 
Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), International Development Research Centre (IDRC, 
Canada), Sahel Institute (INSAH), the West Africa Rice Development Association (WARDA) now called the 
African Rice Centre, and the World Agro-forestry Centre (ICRAF)( ASTI, 2004). 

 

The earlier emphasis of INRAN was on plant breeding: the development of dwarf and early maturing varieties, 
which are two characteristics that are suitable for Niger's arid climate. Improved varieties were promoted 
throughout the country with the accompanying agronomic recommendations. These were for high-input, mono-
cropped farming systems, which turned out to be highly inappropriate for the on-farm realities of Niger. Over the 
past 30 years INRAN has done a lot of work on extension and seed multiplication for improved varieties of 
millet, cowpeas and sorghum. However the adoption rate of these improved varieties was very limited 


(Valentina and Samba, 1994). The same authors indicate that in the past the adoption rates of most improved 
cereals were very low in Niger. The reasons for this were that research focused on food crops and the research 
agenda was of little relevance to on-farm production constraints. Another reason is the lack of participation of 
farmers in research. 

 

In recent years INRAN has begun to shift its approach to a demand-driven research agenda, allowing for 
feedback from farmers and consumers. The agronomy department has started developing time and location 
specific agronomic recommendations (Valentina and Samba, 1994). The rural economics department of INRAN 
has institutionalized a system of on-farm trials to identify the most urgent production constraints faced by 
farmers. Additionally, a cereal-quality laboratory has been established to test new varieties for consumer 
concerns, such as cooking characteristics (Valentina and Samba, 1994). 

3.4 NGOs and Donors 




This section gives an overview of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and donors that are involved in 
dryland areas of Ethiopia and/or Niger. The section starts at the international level and moves down national 
level. First some important international organizations are mentioned, starting with the United Nations’s IFAD 
and the World Bank’s TerrAfrica. The European Union is mentioned in this part, because it is a supra-national 
organization. The international NGO SOS Sahel is followed by the programmes of a number of relevant 
development agencies of national governments. Lastly, two national NGOs are mentioned. They are referred to 
here as national NGOs because while they operate internationally, they are not part of an international umbrella 
NGO. International Organizations 

3.4.1 IFAD 

The International Fund for Agricultural Development is a specialized agency of the United Nations established 
as an international financial institution in 1977 as one of the major outcomes of the 1974 World Food 
Conference. It was established for the reason that seventy-five per cent of the world's poorest people - 1.05 
billion women, children and men - live in rural areas and depend on agriculture and related activities for their 
livelihoods. IFAD is dedicated to eradicating rural poverty in developing countries. IFAD, in coordination with 
the government of Ethiopia, is implementing a special country programme (SCP). In addition to increasing 
production and farmer income through expansion of traditional small-scale irrigation schemes, SCP is working 
on the strengthening of farmer’s institutions (e.g. farmers’ organizations) as well as improvement of agricultural 
services such as extension services and seed multiplication. In Niger, in the Aguié region, IFAD has developed 
a project for the promotion of local initiatives for development, based on a new approach to fostering pro-poor 
innovation in agricultural, social, organizational and economic areas. The methodology consists of three steps: 
(i) identifying and recognizing local innovations; ii) selecting the innovations that are relevant and accessible to 
poor rural people; and iii) conducting joint trials in which farmers demonstrate their innovations to other farmers, 
researchers and extension workers while testing ways to improve them and apply them on a wider scale. As a 
result of the dissemination of these innovations (in agro-forestry, soil fertility and local seed management), 
agricultural production is expected to be more stable and smallholders will be better able to manage risk (IFAD, 
2009). 

 

3.4.2 TerrAfrica 

TerrAfrica was initiated by the World Bank and its partners. It was launched in 2005 to ‘support and strengthen 
the implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), Comprehensive 
Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development’s 
(NEPAD) Action Plan of the Environment’ (TerrAfrica, 2009; World Bank, 2009). Their mission is to harmonize 
the strategies concerning soil- and land-management, with East-Africa as its main focus. Trying to accomplish 
this, they work along three activity lines: coalition building, knowledge management and investment, which are 
mainly at national level. Some partners of TerrAfrica are the UN programmes, IFAD, CGIAR centres and the 
European Union (TerrAfrica, 2009). 

3.4.3 European Union 

Infrastructure (water, energy and roads), agricultural exports, rural development programmes and food aid 
security are the main focus of the European Commission support for Ethiopia (EC, 2008). A new budget of € 


644 Million is signed for 2008-2013 (EC, 2008). “Life sciences and biotechnology — A strategy for Europe” 
mentions some more specific support for developing countries. Concerning genetic resources the following 
actions are formulated, (a) redefining of national research towards an appropriate mix of traditional techniques 
and new technologies, based on priorities developed with local farmers. Subsequently, (b) the establishment of 
effective research partnerships between public and private research organizations in developing countries and 
in the EU. In addition, the adequate capacity and infrastructure for developing countries to enter into such 
partnerships, in accordance with international commitments under the conventions, are mentioned (EC, 2002). 
This suggests that the incorporation of traditional techniques into research will also be supported by giving 
developing countries the opportunity to work in partnerships with the EU. 

 

In addition, Europe is involved with the CGIAR since their foundation in 1971. For the year 2007, they provided 
45% of its budget, about € 400 Million (ICARDA, 2008). An illustrating quote of the EU representative in the 
10th session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee of the Convention to Combat Desertification: ‘the 
EU has over a long period of time been the largest external source of finance to combat desertification, 
particularly in Africa’ (SIDA, 1997: 51). However, despite the fact that the EU finds the involvement and 
participation of local communities and other stakeholders important, its CCD planning framework shows many 
top-down approaches constraining this (SIDA, 1997). 

 

In 2002, at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, the EU-Africa ‘Water for 
Life’ agreement was signed (EC, 2009). As part of this agreement two dryland related projects have been 
implemented in Niger: ‘Programme de développement d'une zone pastorale’ and ‘Utilisation of wastewater for 
fuel and fodder production and environmental and social benefits in semi-arid peri-urban zones of sub-Saharan 
Africa’. The first one concerns sustainable lowland-use, innovative agriculture and irrigation; the second 
focuses on irrigation and training of local researchers (EC, 2009). One of the projects in Ethiopia is called 
‘Integrated Nutrient Management to attain sustainable productivity increases in East African farming systems’. It 
aims to develop an institutionally sustainable approach to identify, test, monitor and evaluate farm- or 
catchment-level technologies addressing soil nutrient management constraints using principles and institutional 
aspects of the Farmers Field School approach (EC, 2009). 

3.4.4 NGOs and Development Agencies 




3.4.4.1 SOS Sahel 

SOS Sahel International is a federation of European and African Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 
from countries including France, United Kingdom, Luxemburg and Switzerland. They operate in Niger, Mali, 
Mauritania, Senegal, Burkina Faso and Sudan. SOS Sahel works with rural people across the Sahelian zone of 
sub-Saharan Africa. They “support community actions and initiatives that focus on conserving natural resources 
and increasing family food production” (SOS Sahel, 2009).The Sahel oral history project (SOHP) is one of the 
major initiatives of SOS Sahel International that might help to bring knowledge at the field level into the national 
and international research programmes. Interviews were conducted from June 1989 to July 1990 in eight 
Sahelian countries including Ethiopia and Niger. About 500 men and women were interviewed and given the 
chance to talk about their experiences, priorities, and perspectives. In Niger SOS Sahel works with pastoralist 
institutions to find a useful tool to bring their priorities and vision to policy-makers. One of SOS Sahel’s major 
achievements in Niger has been the handing over of neglected local forest plantations from the State Forestry 
Service to twelve communities in the Zinder region. 

 

3.4.4.2 Danida 

The Danish International Development Assistance (Danida) is part of the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Danida provides financial support to multi-lateral projects and diverse programmes implemented by 
international organisations such as the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO), the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Bank Group. 

 

Between November 2003 and February 2004 Danida conducted research on Farmer Empowerment initiatives 
in Africa implemented by different donors. It investigated the type of organisations supported, who they 
represent, dimensions of Farmer Empowerment pursued and the success in achieving empowerment and 


development outcomes (Technical Advisory Service Danida, 2004). (See appendix for a summary of the 
results) 

3.4.4.3 GTZ 

The German Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) is “a government-owned international 
cooperation enterprise focusing on sustainable development with worldwide operations” (GTZ, 2009). It works 
in countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Eastern Europe and the New Independent States. Their objective is 
to “improve people’s living conditions on a sustainable basis” (GTZ, 2009). The German Federal Ministry for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (known by their German acronym, BMZ), United Nations (UN), 
European Union and World Bank are some of the clients GTZ works for (GTZ, 2009). 

3.4.4.4 USAID 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is an independent federal government 
agency of the United States of America (USA), working in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Latin America and 
Caribbean, Europe and Eurasia, and the Middle East. Their aim is to assist countries ‘recovering from a 
disaster, trying to escape poverty, and engaging in democratic reforms’ (USAID, 2009). Four themes describe 
their strategy: expand and improve trade, improve the sustainability of agriculture, mobilize science and 
technology, and strengthen training and education. For each situation different weights are given to the themes. 
To implement the strategy they have formulated some ‘next steps’: ‘strengthen donor coordination in 
agricultural planning and activity implementation’ (USAID, 2004), and ‘develop state-of-the-art courses on 
strategic agriculture issues’ (USAID, 2004). 

3.4.4.5 FARM-Africa 

FARM-Africa operates in East Africa and is focused on reducing poverty for African farmers, herders and forest 
dwellers. By managing the natural resources effectively they want to make long term improvements to the 
wellbeing of the local people. Their strategy is focused on four key outcomes: develop models of good-practice, 
guide governments towards supporting agricultural development, share expertise with other stakeholders and 
lastly, increase the understanding of, and engagement in, African agriculture (FARM-Africa, 2009). 

3.4.4.6 Eden Foundation 

The Eden Foundation, founded in 1985, originated from the basis that there were effective means available for 
the fulfilment of goals of the people living in the arid areas of North West Africa. They use drought tolerant 
edible perennial plants that could potentially grow in such a harsh environment without artificial support. In 1988 
they set up a field station in Niger to perform direct seeding experiments and arouse the interest of surrounding 
farmers at the same time (passive transfer) (Eden foundation, 1999). Other field experiments include how best 
to establish a healthy population of Faidherbia albida by direct sowing, performed in 1990. The tested seeds 
that were most promising were to be distributed for free to interested farmers. Since most farmers were 
illiterate, seed envelopes with advice in symbols were produced. The recommended tools are those that the 
farmers already have. The intention of this project is not to approach farmers but to let them initiate contact out 
of their own curiosity and initiative. The field station lets farmers observe, like through a shop window. Only 
when invited to a village Eden would visit it. To map the farmers’ preference, a register is kept of which seeds 
they order. The seeds are for free but the farmers pay by means of investing parts of their land and time to 
participate in the research. The farmers who implemented direct seeding methods will be visited annually as 
long as they wanted to continue, their results will be monitored and new seed orders taken. “The farm would be 
seen as the outer field station and the farmers as receiving free seeds as a compensation for participating in 
this research” (Eden foundation, 1999). 

 

Furthermore, local extension workers were selected based on their attitude towards farmers. They must see 
themselves as serving the farmer and they are trained by the project (Eden foundation, 1999). 

 

 

 


4. Reflection 

This chapter provides a reflection of the policies studied in the previous chapter. First an introduction is given 
on how research has evolved, followed by sections where the main focus of different actors, namely the 
government, research, other organizations and farmers, is discussed. 

4.1 Reflection on the past 




In dryland agriculture there are a lot of production constraints that need research, however budgets allocated to 
research have remained low. Research in dryland Africa has been characterized by a top-down vision 
concerning the process of innovation. Another characteristic for dryland research in Africa is that in the past 
research institutes were focused on high productivity by using high input, and little consideration was given to 
farmers’ concerns. Since the 1960s, farming system research has developed. Subsequently, research and 
experiments are conducted with more emphasis on farmer participation. A model of “transfer of technology” has 
been employed, in which technologies are developed by researchers and then transferred to the farmer, by use 
of the extension system (Clark, 2001). This works well with a high density of research and extension workers in 
relation to farmers. People know each other and feedback flows back into research easily. This is, however, 
very costly and it becomes a thin chain in case there are many dispersed smallholder farmers, and sparse 
numbers of researchers and extension officers. The risk is that researchers do not take into account the 
concerns of farmers, and the technologies they develop might not be adopted. NGOs can give support directly 
in this thin chain. 

Over time NGOs have become more important; their budgets are substantial compared to those of local 
governments. Furthermore, larger NGOs are able to combine efforts with international research institutes (like 
ICRISAT and ICARDA). (N de Ridder 2009, pers. comm., 28 May) 

4.2 Comparison of government policies 




Policies of both countries are different in their structure and content. Ethiopian policy is more general; it 
identifies the major problems, the possible contributions of key actors, and sets strategies for each agro-
ecological zone, and how to implement and who applies it. Concerning the identification of the dryland 
problems, more emphasis is given to farmers, farmers’ problems and the specific agro-ecological problems 
facing them. However, these concepts are applied in a manner that is top-down, and market oriented. In the 
end, the objective still is to get knowledge from researchers to farmers, through the work of extension agents, 
rather than the other way around. 

Policy in Niger acknowledges that participation is an important concept in the setting of priorities at every level 
of decision making. How this participation is achieved and the outcomes applied remains vague. The policies 
could not indicate how people are involved in decision making or how solutions are implemented. However, in 
priority setting participation is a bottom-up approach. Currently in Niger 33 ongoing experiments focus on 
construction of anti-erosion systems to combat erosion and runoff, construction of manure pits for the 
maintenance of soil fertility and plantation of plant species for sand dune fixation. Mobilizing project 
implementers present in the field, sometimes the farmers’ organizations themselves, is the main element in 
these experiments. The focus of livestock projects was on improving races/breeds, developing animal health 
monitoring and optimizing fodder balances. Next to this, development projects proposed to improve animal 
productivity and to optimize and secure fodder resources in pastoral areas. (D Hamiduo 2009, pers. comm., 4 
June) 

4.3 Evaluation of research strategies 




This section addresses the state of research into dryland areas, both by national and international research 
institutes. Two gaps in the research agenda are observed. This section will conclude with several reasons why 
research might have underperformed, with respect to the application of knowledge produced. 

The NARS in Ethiopia do have an attractive strategy featuring examples of farmer participation in research. 
However, implementation remains limited to a small number of cases. In the past the Ethiopian NARS did not 
give much attention to dryland regions of the country. This is changing, and now research centres have been 
established in different dryland regions of the country. On the other hand agricultural research centres in Niger 


are more focused on crop breeding and farmers’ participation in research is limited. Moreover, farmers do not 
have the opportunity to share their knowledge with researchers. 

As for the international research organizations, the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) is 
committed to farmers’ participation in research, and it has some promising projects in livestock research which 
can significantly contribute to dryland agriculture. 

A general problem in research is that where the food security problems are the most severe there is the lowest 
density of agricultural research (H van Dijk, 5-6-2009). To a certain extent, NGOs fill this gap in research; they 
try out different crop varieties and technologies, but they largely work parallel to research institutes. There is not 
much cooperation and communication between them (H van Dijk 2009, pers. comm., 5 June). Nevertheless, 
potential synergies exist between research and NGOs; researchers could provide the argumentation and proof 
why NGO’s or government’s policies should be reconsidered. For instance, the Ethiopian government leases 
the best lands to foreign investors (Chinese, Saudi, investors in biofuels) while these lands are crucial to 
pastoralists, especially in times of severe drought. (W Goris (Agri-Profocus) 2009, pers. comm., 3 June) 

One issue, in which research is lacking, is in biodiversity and agroforestry. Dr. Fetien Abay, a researcher at 
Ethiopia’s Mekelle University, addresses the importance of focusing on biodiversity, especially issues on wildlife 
conservation and ecotourism biodiversity management. She states that the science of biodiversity, the effects 
of climate change on biodiversity, forestry, especially that of dryland forestry is in its infancy in Ethiopia. She 
also stresses that the local knowledge about biodiversity conservation should be given priority. Trees can be 
used as valuable sources of fuel wood, fodder, bee forage, medicinal value and income generation. Local 
people know how to use them, their selection criteria and knowledge should be integrated in the research 
agenda (F Abay 2009, pers. comm., 12 June). 

Another gap in the research agenda is the study of adaptation mechanisms of farmers. In general, there exists 
very little common understanding between farmers and researchers (F Abay 2009, pers. comm., 12 June; H 
van Dijk 2009, pers. comm., 5 June; Kaboré and Reij, 2004). For an example of this, see the box below. 

 

 

Two issues stand in the way of increasing farmer participation; firstly there is considerable pressure on 
researchers to publish and bring money into the research organization, university or company. Even if 
researchers have a personal interest in applying their knowledge at farm level, they will not get rewarded for it. 
The focus in research is largely on getting published, and the results of applied research are harder to get 
published than the results of on-station trials (M Hailu, pers. experience; C Reij 2009, pers. comm., 3 June; T 
Crane 2009, pers. comm., 4 June). 

Another issue can be that science is often seen as the only knowledge creator. However, everybody creates 
knowledge. Sometimes farmers do their own research, but it is not legitimized to be used in science (T Crane 
2009, pers. comm., 4 June). 

Box 2 The research on soil fertility management 

Farmer perspectives vs. research perspectives 

A key part of farming is the management of soil fertility, from a study in Niger: they apply manure on 
one specific part of the field while other parts remain unfertilized. In a good season, when the rainfall 
is high and consistent, the yield of the manure covered land is increased. However, if the rainfall is 
not consistent, the manure might induce fast growth early in the season, leaving the plant vulnerable 
to dry spells later on in the season. So selectively applying the manure is a strategy to cope with the 
risk of erratic rainfall. For researchers, working in the controlled environment of research stations, 
this is easily seen as irrational behaviour. Hence, the fact that farmers are very skilled in 
manipulating soil fertility is under-appreciated. (H van Dijk 2009, pers. comm., 5 June) 


4.4 The approach of other organizations 




In general donors and NGOs put more emphasis on farmer participation than governments do. But there is a 
large variety in approaches. This is partly due to the varied nature of these organizations. 

Organizations, such as Danida, GTZ, IFAD and TerrAfrica often work together with partners at a national level, 
such as universities and governments. While these organizations see farmers as essential stakeholders, their 
focus is on the linkages between the mentioned stakeholders. The emphasis often is on issues like fighting 
corruption, promoting good governance and engaging in political dialogue. These issues have a wider impact 
than just dryland agriculture. However, because they work at a national level, their method of working is top-
down, with little scope for empowerment of local producers. 

The USAID has a different vision; they are more market oriented than the organizations mentioned above. They 
really focus to ‘build efficient and competitive economies’ (USAID, 2009). Even in their ‘Farmer to Farmer’ 
project the accent is on economic impact (USAID, 2009). 

Local producers seem to have a larger role in the projects of organizations such as FARM-Africa, SOS Sahel 
and the Eden Foundation. FARM-Africa has a strategy mainly on participation, shown in their Farmer 
Participation Research (FPR). Also mobile outreach camps are used to reach the pastoralists, while they travel 
around (FARM-Africa, 2009). SOS Sahel’s Oral History Project is one example on how to make farmers and 
pastoralist heard in policy circles. The vision of the Eden foundation is: “Goals of a donor need to be in 
harmony with goals of a project that in turn needs to be in harmony with goals of a recipient.” To achieve this 
they start with the goals of the recipient. Plans should not be followed to the letter, but flexible and the donor 
and the researchers should evaluate how satisfied the recipients are. The project should not serve the donor 
but the recipient. 

4.5 Farmers’ perceptions 




In the end, innovation is – at least partly – a social affair. It is not the availability of technologies that matter, but 
the decision by practitioners to adopt the technologies and incorporate them in their daily practices (Mazzucato 
et al., 2001). The reasons why farmers choose to adopt a technology are of crucial importance for researchers. 

According to Han van Dijk, in arid regions drought and pest resistance have most priority for farmers, more than 
soil fertility. To illustrate this, when soil fertility is high, then the risk of crop failure is also high. If there is a good 
rainy season one produces a lot of biomass, but if there is a drought, this big crop needs much more water than 
a small crop. So where crops are growing very well, they are more susceptible to drought (see box above). 
Researchers have often failed to understand farmers’ perception of risk and the roles the concepts such as soil 
fertility and moisture availability play in this. 

Another concern for farmers is the short term profitability of technologies Baidu-Forson (1999) provides an 
analysis of factors influencing technology adoption in Niger. While it is commonly perceived that the focus of 
short-term profits hinders the adoption of technologies that conserve natural resources, this is not necessarily 
the case (C Reij 2009, pers. comm., 3 June). There is a wide variety of technologies, that both increase profits 
for farmers, and allow them to conserve their soil and water resources (see e.g. Haggblade et al., 2003a). 

In order to take these concerns into account, research needs more input from farmers. In this chapter, some 
examples of trends towards more integration of farmer knowledge into research programmes have been given, 
but there still is a long way to go. 

 

 

 


5. Question 1: How to bring the knowledge at field level into research 
programmes? 




In order to answer this question, different sources of information from different levels in organizations are 
investigated. Approaches of governments, international organizations, research institutes, NGOs and experts 
are presented in this order. Initiatives as well as constrains and obstacles will pass the review. Among this, 
participatory methods, interest attitudes of researchers and funding problems will be addressed. 

5.1 Policy context and initiatives undertaken 




Policies of both countries emphasize the importance of economic development in general and contribution of 
agriculture to food security in particular. This will be achieved by participation of all actors and special attention 
is given to participation of farmers. Farmers are key players in problem identification and developing solutions 
in the struggle of food insecurity, rehabilitation and utilization of natural resources. Participatory methods are 
needed. In order to include developments from the field in research programmes, links between researchers 
and farmers need to be strengthened. 

 

An impression of the government policies shows that fostering the participation in knowledge development and 
innovation to adapt to the changing environment is not addressed. As an example, studies show that the 
relationships among research, extension and education policy is top down, supply driven, not multi-disciplinary 
and priorities are not beneficial for the small holder farmer or their innovation. Ethiopia’s innovation climate is 
weak; the innovation follows a linear path of supply driven technology dissemination through public sectors 
(Spielman et al., 2008). 

 

One of the ways the EC shows in focussing more on the field level is that with the Generation Challenge 
Programmes (GCP) project proposals, a plan should be included describing how the results will be 
implemented. This is presented as a way to concentrate the minds of researchers on the end-user. Also, but 
still top-down, is that the EC and the CGIAR acknowledge the need to include participatory approaches and 
close partnerships with NARS, community based organizations, farmer groups and the private sector (Ooijen 
and Coombs, 2007). 

 

Since late 1990s, IFAD’s program in Niger has focused on valuing local knowledge and stimulating innovation 
for poverty reduction. Using grant-financed activities as a starter, IFAD has developed a large investment 
program. A project for the promotion of local initiatives for development in Aguié, is based on a new approach 
to foster pro-poor innovation in agricultural, social, organizational and economic areas. The main strategy 
consists of an action-research-training methodology, aiming at constructing equal relationships between 
extension workers, researchers and farmers. This includes encouraging of further knowledge-sharing among 
neighbouring villages and creating synergies between local knowledge and scientific knowledge originating 
from various knowledge institutions (NARS, CGIAR centres, universities) (IFAD, 2007). 

 

According to the strategies of the international research institutes investigated in this study, they gain 
knowledge from the field through farmer field schools and surveys. ICRISAT declares they use this information 
to improve the institutions (micro-credit, insurance) around the farmers (ICRISAT, Dar, 2007:28). ICARDA 
states that participatory approaches will enhance ´technology adoption by end users´ (ICARDA, 2007b:8). This 
suggests that farmers´ participation and knowledge are seen mainly as a source for improving the uptake of 
technology. ILRI’s technology transfer strategy mentions farmers’ participation in evaluation, which means that 
farmers give feedback on the technology. Participation seems to be mainly ex-post. 

There are some initiatives to change this though: Farmers Field Schools, as part of the ILRI strategy for 
example, is an interesting approach to take traditional knowledge and use in research programmes. In this 
school principle, there is no teacher and farmers and experts all have equal room to share their knowledge 
(Asiabaka, 2002). However, this approach is not practiced as yet in either of the study countries. On the other 
hand, the NARS of Ethiopia facilitate farmers’ field surveys, which assess production potential and problems as 
well as local knowledge of a certain area (EIAR, 2009). Executing base line surveys before setting a research 
agenda may be a bridge to link field knowledge and research programmes. Beside this, the Farmers’ Research 


Group (FRG) approach is an interesting way to facilitate this linkage. An FRG is a group that consists of 
interested farmers, who have their contact person in a multidisciplinary research team of a research centre for 
technical advice (EIAR, 2008). Furthermore, the Research Extension Liaison Committee (RELC) development 
gives significant contribution to the transfer of traditional knowledge to the research programmes. The RELC is 
a committee composed of researchers, extension agents and representative farmers. The major activity of this 
committee is to create favourable conditions for researchers, extension officers and farmers to discuss certain 
issues or prepare discussion forums (Casas et al., 1999). 

 

Nonetheless, Djibo Hamiduo, AGRYMET, indicates that the evolution of West Africa's farmer communities and 
their structuring into professional farmers' organizations (FO) facilitated the identification and design of new 
projects, which are better in line with farmers' concerns (Box 3). 

 

Box 3 Farmers’ organizations 

 

The 1980s and 1990s were years of growth for farmers' organizations in developing countries, both at local 
level and higher (national and international, with FO federations and networks). FOs perform many roles, 
generally combining a number of different functions. This is either because of deficiencies in their environment 
or because a combination of roles is necessary if they are to provide their members with services and at the 
same time achieve a higher national political profile. However, a FO that is too specialized can be vulnerable in 
the unstable environment of rural affairs in developing countries. 

 

Farmers' organizations frequently perform three major roles. As a first, provide services to their members: 
technical (like promoting technical innovation to improve their members' income) or economic (FOs may be full 
economic operators through the harvesting and marketing of their produce or the supply of agricultural inputs). 
Secondly, they represent their members' interests and, more widely, the interests of farmers and others living in 
rural areas. This includes the formulation of claims in negotiations, drawing-up proposals to contribute to the 
definition of agricultural and rural policies, and involvement in the management of agricultural sectors. Finally 
,they may also be involved in local development, providing social investment (schools, health centres, literacy 
programmes and so one). 

(D Hamidou, pers. comm., 19 June) 

 

 

Different NGOs have interesting experiences on linking field knowledge and research programmes. TerrAfrica 
acknowledges the importance to include the civil society in the process to fight land degradation. Knowledge of 
the farmers is used in two ways, at a platform level and at the local level. At a platform, community 
representatives participate in a workshop and give ideas and feedback. At local level, the farmers are involved 
in programming, designing, development, implementation and evaluation of the projects (TerrAfrica, 2009). 
FARM-Africa has the same idea about the participation of farmers in the steps from development to evaluation. 
The knowledge of the farmer is used in Farmer Training Schools (MATF and FARM-Africa, 2007). In Ethiopia 
the Farmer Participation Research (FPR) theory values the knowledge of farmers and scientists equally. They 
believe that when knowledge and capabilities of both sides are shared, the most effective solution can be 
found. However, some scientists are sceptical about this approach and think it is not proper science (Ejigu and 
Waters-Bayer, 2005). USAID uses the Farmer-to-Farmer (FTF) Program to reduce the knowledge gap between 
field level and research programmes in developing countries. This focuses mainly on the development of new 
technologies and on the use of natural resources. In addition to that, it facilitates the education of farmers to 
develop skills by using traditional and modern knowledge (USAID, 2009). 

 

The Sahel oral history project (SOHP) is one of the major initiatives of SOS Sahel international that might help 
to bring knowledge at the field level into the national and international research programmes (IDRC, 2009). 
SOS development intervention policy aims to work through existing local structures by training farmers so they 
can become self-reliant and manage their own projects in the future. Their activities include capacity building of 
village development committees by developing associations on subjects such as Participatory Rural Appraisal, 
organizational management, book-keeping, project design, monitoring and advocacy (SOS Sahel, 2009). In 


Niger, SOS Sahel UK is working with pastoralist associations to determine a useful tools to help pastoralists 
manage their environment and to bring their knowledge and vision to policy-makers (SOS Sahel, 2009). 

 

The Eden foundation works with the intention to not approach farmers but let them start contact from their own 
curiosity and initiative (passive transfer). The field station enables farmers to observe, similar to looking in a 
shop window and only when invited to a village, Eden would visit it. Farmers receive the seeds for free, but in 
return they take part in research by means of investing space and time. Their results would be monitored and 
new seed orders during an annual visit. Moreover, local extension workers were selected to be trained by the 
project if they met the requirement of respect the farmers in a way that they saw themselves as serving the 
farmer (Eden foundation, 1999). 

5.2 Experiences of experts 




Dr. Wellington Ekaya explains that next to capacity building for dryland communities to enable them to set the 
research agenda and demonstrate the potential of drylands, policy makers at national and international levels 
need to appreciate the plight of dryland communities and the need to invest in Africa’s drylands (WN Ekaya 
2009, pers. comm., 15 June). The third solution he describes is the importance of networking between 
individuals, NGOs, funding agencies, research institutions, etc working in the drylands. This will be addressed 
in when answering question 3. 

 

One of the main obstacles in linking farmers and researchers is the fact that budgets reserved for agriculture 
have been slashed in recent decades (Haggblade et al., 2003b). Han van Dijk, Wageningen University, refers 
to this by saying, that governments have cut back budgets for research, so research should be left to the 
market. Ken Giller, Wageningen University, even states that: usually agricultural research is underfunded by 
governments in dryland countries. Moreover, NGOs working there have more money to do research, large 
NGOs even have a larger importance in this context than governments in dryland countries (K Giller 2009, 
pers. comm., 28 June) . 

 

Fetien Abay of Mekelle University Ethiopia agrees with the importance of field knowledge for research 
programmes. Research should focus on indigenous knowledge and lessons from nature about plant genetic 
resources, land management, indigenous trees, shrubs and bushes with respect to their use, management and 
production potential. For example, it is estimated that around 12% out of 6,500 to 7,000 of higher plant species 
in Ethiopia are endemic. Beside this, forest cover is estimated to be around 3% and these endemic plants are 
in grave danger of disappearance even before their potential is well studied, though in most cases local people 
know and use them (F Abay 2009, pers. comm., 12 June; H van Dijk 2009, pers. comm., 5 June). According to 
Han van Dijk, the presence of researchers in dryland regions is a necessity. They should study farmer practices 
and maybe find ways of introducing more drought resistant crops into this system. Next to this, drought 
resistant crops in one area should be tested in an area with higher rainfall, but there are other difficulties (F 
Abay 2009, pers. comm., 12 June). Tesfay Belay agrees with Han van Dijk concerning the importance of 
research on drought resistant crops, but mentions trees (T. Belay 2009, pers. comm., 5 June). 

Unfortunately the attitude of researchers forms another obstacle. Dryland research is not perceived as 
interesting, but rather too variable to understand. Even if a government would make demands for dryland 
research, researchers could still refuse (Box 4). Donors and even NGOs consider dryland regions too difficult, 
so their strategy should also change. (H van Dijk 2009, pers. comm., 5 June) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To summarize, policies of the governments and the EC address a top down approach and are not focussed on 
participatory research. Although, the EC supports farmers’ participation through the CGIAR centres top down 

Box 4 Story of failure 

For example, the WARDA in Mali investigated cultivating flood rice in the river Niger area. 
After 3 years the researchers said they couldn’t handle the climate variability and the building 
was closed down. While rice is the major crop in that region and 1.5-2 million people live 
there. People prefer this local rice and it is worth more money on the market. (H van Dijk 
2009, pers. comm., 5 June) 


approaches still exist. IFAD at least aims to strengthen and encourage farmer research links. Farmers’ Field 
Schools, Farmers’ Research Group, Research Extension Liaison Committees and farmers' organizations are 
some of the initiatives providing room for knowledge transfer from farmers to researchers. Different NGOs have 
a focus on participation of farmers, such as the platforms of TerrAfrica. Experts experiences used in this 
chapter stress the importance of networks. 

 


6 Question 2: Is there a need for harmonization of policies and 
interventions in the field? 




This chapter will try to answer the question whether there is a need for harmonization of policies and 
interventions in the field. First a general answer to the question will be given, followed by some examples 
stressing the need for harmonization. 

6.1 Introduction 




In Paris at 2nd March 2005 ministers of developed and developing countries, multilateral and bilateral 
development institutions signed the Paris Declaration. It addresses five main issues for development 
programmes, namely ownership, alignment, harmonization, management of project results and mutual 
accountability. Focusing on the harmonization, it is argued that there is a need for harmonization of policies and 
interventions at the international, national, and local levels (OECD, 2005). 

 

In order to assess the need for harmonization of policies in Ethiopia, a questionnaire was sent to an Ethiopian 
researcher, as part of the research for this report. It became clear that policies play a key role in ensuring that 
people invest in using available resources sustainably to improve their livelihoods. Policies should improve 
research-extension-farmer (community) linkages and co-operation, integrate traditional knowledge with 
innovative technology, and improve stakeholder’s stakeholder participation in research, extension, training, 
awareness and education programmes (D Hamidou 2009, pers. comm., 4 June). 

6.2 Subjects for harmonization 




In order to give a better idea why harmonization is needed, some examples will be discussed now. First two 
examples at government level are given, followed by two examples from research centres. Finally an example 
of NGOs is issued. 

6.2.1 Government policy 




Mulat (1999) mentioned there has been no change applied to the policies of Ethiopia (as cited by 
Geberesselasie, 2000) in the last three decades, so they do not address policy harmonization issues. Within 
the government policy harmonization is needed between the rural and agricultural development policy and the 
land policy at two points. 

 

The first contradiction within the policies is about the land tenure. The rural and agricultural development policy 
from 2001 urges farmers to have a non-agricultural employment to generate income. However the land policy 
of 1994 argues that farmers lose their land when they don’t farm the land for a certain time. So on the one hand 
the farmers are pushed to do off-farm employment; on the other hand they lose their land when they leave it. 

 

The second contradiction within the policies is in the investment in land. The rural and agricultural development 
policy from 2001 stresses the need for the technological development in soil and water conservation. These 
activities need high capital and labour investments and it takes time to recoup this investment. However the 
land policy of 1994 states that land can be redistributed whenever it is needed. Farmers do get a compensation 
for their investment, but land tenure insecurity causes low investment and need conservation measures 
(Gemedhin et al., 2003; J de Graaff 2009, pers. comm., 11 June). So on the one hand the farmers are pushed 
to do long term investments and on the other hand they could lose their land at any time without receiving a fair 
amount of money for their investments. 

6.2.2 Research centres practices 




In Ethiopia the national agricultural research system has a good strategy to use participatory research. 
However, on the ground level not a lot of participatory research is done. Therefore harmonization between 
policies and interventions is needed (Y Abebaw (Gondar Agricultural Research Centre, Ethiopia) 2009, pers. 
comm., 10 June). 

 


Another example is the use of modern techniques in drylands. Agriculture in most of dryland Africa is not 
constrained because of poor quality of starting material, but because of low soil fertility and water scarcity. The 
traditional way of coping with low soil fertility in Niger is to let land fallow for long periods (more than seven 
years). Growing population pressure has made this strategy impossible, and most plots of land are now under 
permanent cultivation (Wezel and Haigis, 2002). Farm modelling suggests that this intensification of land use 
will eventually lead most farmers to adopt improved technologies such as fertilizer and improved varieties, but 
not after the possibilities of more traditional technologies have been exhausted (Abdoulaye and Lowenberg-
DeBoer, 2000). Among the reasons why farmers are reluctant to adopt “modern” technologies like inorganic 
fertilizer is the risk associated with them. Inorganic fertilizer can greatly increase crop yields, but only when 
sufficient water is available. If rains fail, any investment made in fertilizer is made useless. Measures aimed at 
improving seeds, increasing soil fertility and promoting water saving are thus intimately related. It is therefore of 
vital importance that actors planning interventions in any of these fields see their actions as interrelated with all 
the other issues. Failure to do so is one of the reasons why past performance of interventions in the drylands 
has been poor (Sanders and Shapiro, 2003). 

6.2.3 International Organizations 




TerrAfrica is very much involved in the alignment and harmonization of policies and interventions at (sub-) 
regional level. They argue harmonization is needed at policy level, so that interventions can also be 
harmonized. Now there are still projects duplicating and overlapping, while time and money can be spent 
better. A framework can be provided when policies are harmonized at lower level through dialogues. 
Consequently it is easier to set soil- and land-management at the country’s national agenda (Global 
Mechanism of the UNCCD, 2009). Other organizations such as Danida, SOS Sahel and IFAD are working with 
other international multinational donors in their efforts to implement the Paris Declaration. Partners in the 
developing countries have been primarily advocated to focus on harmonizing of the financial and administrative 
arrangements necessary to improve aid delivery particularly in the light of donor commitments to scaling up aid. 
Danida, SOS Sahel and IFAD considered harmonization of donor procedures, adoption of joint approaches, 
and alignment with partner country financial management systems as an essential input to make aid more 
effective (OECD, 2005). 

 

All actors in the dryland field call for the need of policies and interventions harmonization, each from his point of 
view. For example there is a contradiction between the land tenure and rural and agricultural development 
policy of the Ethiopian government. Both the national agricultural research institutions and NGOs showed a 
need for coordination between policies and implementation interventions for participatory field research as well. 
International initiatives such as Paris Declaration working on harmonization authenticate the need for 
harmonization of policies and interventions at the international, national, regional and local levels (OECD, 
2005). 

 

International initiatives such as the Paris Declaration working on harmonization stress the need for 
harmonization of policies and interventions at the international, national, regional and local levels (OECD, 
2005). 

 


7 Question 3: How to set up a more concerted network between 
policies, research programmes and interventions in the field? 




When considering the options to create a more coherent set of policies that tackle the combined problems of 
dryland farmers and pastoralists, it is important to realize that every specific locality has its own problems. This 
means that blanket technical recommendations for an entire country are not appropriate (Anderson et al., 
2003). There exists some tension here, as approaches and methodologies are needed to go beyond isolated 
pilot projects in order to make a widespread impact on food security. This need for widespread impact makes it 
very tempting to apply technical fixes that affect entire countries or regions. But what works in one region, is not 
guaranteed to work in another, due to differences in local agro-ecological conditions, customs and economic 
realities. However, while success stories themselves might not be replicable, the process with which an 
innovation has been implemented might very well be (Haggblade et al., 2003b). Based on the above the 
question should not be what to research, but how to research it (cf. Omamo, 2003). It is argued here that the 
focus should shift from the development or transfer of technology to the building of institutions that foster 
interactive learning. This is not to say that no effort should be put in the development of new technologies, but 
that the social aspects which govern the development and adoption of new technologies at a local level should 
be given more attention (see e.g. Mazzucato et al., 2001). This suggests getting different stakeholders and 
scientists from different disciplinary background together in partnerships. 

 

This view is shared by numerous organizations in the field, as discussed in Chapter 3. Organizations such as 
TerrAfrica, FARM Africa, GTZ, SOS Sahel USAID and IFAD all place the concept of engaging with local 
partners high on their agenda. A common reason for this is that one organization cannot tackle the multitude of 
issues facing the drylands. 

 

These networks are content related, such as soil and water conservation measures, or improved marketing 
chains. This content is intimately related to the people on the ground, and their systems (arable settled farmers, 
pastoralists, agro-pastoralists). All of them need different networks and partnerships (N de Ridder 2009, pers. 
comm., 28 June). These networks can facilitate the interactive learning between researchers, other experts and 
farmers required for innovation. 

 

 

The next section of this chapter will provide several examples of such partnerships. There are quite a lot of 
these active in the drylands, so the review here is by no means exhaustive, but the aim is to provide an 
overview of how the different actors interact. After discussing these partnerships, our attention will shift to some 
of the factors that influence the success of partnerships and networks. 

Box 5 Why are networks needed? 

Some issues from Ethiopia 

Tesfay Belay of the Tigray Agricultural Research Institute, Mekelle, Ethiopia, testifies of 
African-European partnerships on-going in the region are undertaken in higher 
education institutions, development projects and a number of NGO driven projects. He 
argues that the following issues need to be addressed in research and need 
partnership: 

• Increase moisture availably 


• Identification of trees that suit the drylands 


• Development of technology packages that address moisture deficit 


• Identification of other resources that could address investment 


• Efforts towards decreasing the livestock number while increasing productivity 


• Increased funding of research 




(T Belay 2009, pers. comm., 5 June) 


7.1 Some examples of existing networks 




There are different networks around a research topic, specific for each system of livelihoods, area within a 
country, ecological and economic environment. There are many networks and partnerships in place now. 
Some are partnerships at international level, involving multi-lateral organizations, while some are very local, 
organized around a specific topic, involving NGOs, European and African research institutes and NARS that 
work with extension workers. These research networks are very opportunistic in relation to funding. They are 
also very dynamic; they are dismantled or changed after three or four years (N de Ridder 2009, pers. comm., 
28 June). 

 

SOS Sahel UK has long-established associations with IIED, an independent international research 
organization. Both SOS Sahel UK and IIED also contribute in other international important development issues 
such as the Water Global Initiative, a multi-agency partnership involving organizations working in 13 countries 
in West Africa, East Africa and Central America. Africa SOS Sahel UK offices work in partnership with a 
regional alliance within the African organizations and traditional African institutions in each country it supports. 
These include Pastoralists and Farmers' Unions, Youth Associations and Women's Groups (Sahel, 2009). 

 

IFAD works on facilitating knowledge exchange for the development of Eastern and Southern parts of Africa 
through IFADAFRICA. They work in partnership with national government project staff, country programmes 
management teams and organizations including rural organizations, such as farmers’ organizations, local 
networks and other regional thematic networks to develop skills, opportunity to use natural resources and to 
earn higher incomes by promoting knowledge sharing and innovation for rural poverty reduction (IFADAFRICA, 
2009). 

7.2 What should a network look like? 




The reasons why networks are needed are that different stakeholders can meet and learn from each other, and 
create a motivating environment for innovation and experimentation by local practitioners (Spielman et al., 
2008). This contrasts with the traditional “pipeline” view of technology development and transfer. It implies that 
a system of horizontal partnerships of stakeholders aimed at interactive learning is needed, rather than the 
vertical knowledge chains aimed at technology transfer (Hall et al., 2001). So rather than researchers teaching 
farmers, researchers should also take the time to learn from and work with farmers. Not only researchers and 
farmers are involved in these networks; the multitude of issues requires different stakeholders to be involved. 
Therefore, these horizontal networks should combine different academic disciplines as well as public and 
private parties. Stakeholders that are to be included are researchers and students (from universities and 
institutes, both in the North and the South, and from different disciplinary backgrounds), extension workers, 
NGOs, private companies, and farmer organizations (Spielman et al., 2008). This allows research to be centred 
on the farmer, so constraints and promising innovations at the local level can be identified. 

 

Before such a system can be realized it is important that certain issues are addressed. First is the creation of 
nodes in this system where the relevant stakeholders meet. These nodes of the innovation system could be 
cooperatives, local markets or farmer field schools, but some degree of organization should be present in order 
to aggregate field knowledge and disseminate research knowledge (Clark, 2001). 

 

Secondly, a change of attitudes in universities is needed. More entrepreneurship is needed in order to find 
novel ways to tackle dryland issues that transcend academic disciplines. This means that universities should be 
given incentives to engage in networks that bring together different actors and capabilities, and continued long-
term investment and improvement in the educational and infrastructural foundations of an innovation system 
(Spielman et al., 2008). 

 

The third and one of the most crucial issues to be addressed is the scaling up of success stories. Small scale 
networks of actors should not form isolated islands of innovation, but should be part of a larger system. 
National actors, such as research institutes and extension services have a role to play in the diffusion of 
successful innovations. The best way to get innovations to a farmer is to take that farmer to a place where the 
innovation has been successfully implemented by other farmers, or as Chris Reij put it: “Get farmers in a bus” 


(C Reij 2009, pers. comm., 3 June). Another way would be to make use of existing social networks (Mazzucato 
et al., 2001). 

 

 

 

7.3 Risks 




 

While the creation of networks that take a holistic view on dryland research are very promising, several factors 
are identified that can hinder their implementation. 

 

 

First of all partners need to be aware of the cost of capacity building. Getting researchers and extension 
workers spread across countries as vast as Niger and Ethiopia requires large investments. This means a 
reversal in the trend of lowering agricultural budgets by national governments is needed (Stads et al., 2004; 
Beintema and Solomon, 2003). 

 

A second risk is that despite the promises of innovation networks, actors might prefer to work on their own 
terms. In order to get the necessary level of co-operation, political leverage is needed (W Goris (Agri-Profocus) 

Box 6 Using modern communication technology 

Keeping in touch with farmers far afield used to require a land rover and a dust mask with 
exception of in remote areas. Due to developments in communication technology and its 
rapid adoption throughout Sub Sahara Africa these days might be behind us. The Livestock 
Information and Knowledge System (LINKS) program provides information on issues such 
as prices, water supply, forage conditions to producers, middle men and traders in Kenya, 
Ethiopia and Uganda (GL-CRSP, 2005). This assists them to make informed decisions. 
Real time information is available upon request through SMS-messages. Another such 
initiative is deployed by Afrique Verte – a France-based NGO. In this case the target 
audience are producers of cereals in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger (CTA, 2009). 

For farmers these developments mean they no longer face uncertainties regarding prices 
and the marketability of their produce. Regional decision makers and NGOs now have 
access to real time information about food shortages and diseases. This facilitates rapid 
responses to development on the ground. 

Box 7 Likely determinants of success or failure 

The purpose of networks is to create an environment in which farmer knowledge is 
used in the innovation process. Some likely determinants to succeed in this are: 

• Number and involvement of farmers / community leaders used as trainers 


• Number of women and youth involved and impact of their participation 


• Use of low-impact, simple and self-sustainable technology linked to 
community knowledge systems 


• Extent to which extension interventions are adapted to local needs, level of 
skills and capacity of follow-up through farm tests and pilot schemes 


• Extent to which local communities are encouraged to innovate on their own 


• How readily researchers and research results are integrated into 
communities and policies. 


• Open communication and an equal relation 




(Sources: WN Ekaya 2009, pers. comm. by Hamiduo, 4 June; TerrAfrica, 2005; 
Gilbert et al., 2005) 


2009, pers. comm., 3 June). Key players, such as donors and national governments can provide the necessary 
political pressure to achieve this. However, one of the success factors identified was that partners are equal 
and open in their communication (TerrAfrica, 2005). If one of the key players abuses their political power in a 
way that compromises this openness, the network is at risk. This means a balance is needed between the two; 
some form of pressure might be good, but too much of it will be detrimental. 

 

Another risk to networks is that they rely on personal contacts, to a certain extent. This means that if one 
partner organization has a change of staff, this might lead to a weakening of the network at a crucial time (Ejigu 
and Waters-Bayer, 2005). 

 

To conclude, the problems in dryland farming and pastoral areas are diverse and site specific. Therefore, it 
requires different solutions and interventions for different agro-ecologic conditions, customs and economic 
realities. In order to make an impact across these different site-specific issues, a new approach to research is 
need. It is argued here that partnerships and networks should be central to this approach. However, the 
creation of such an institutional environment from the ground up will require large investments and political will. 
Commitment of all involved stakeholders is needed, in order to make an impact. 

 


8 Conclusion 




African dryland agriculture faces several challenges: the soil is poor in nutrients and under threat of further 
depletion. The main objective of this study is to assess existing policies on dryland issues of Ethiopia and 
Niger, and create a policy position to address the need for an African-European partnership on dryland issues. 
The latter consist of examining three questions of which policy documents of stakeholders, scientific literature 
and expert interviews were the primary sources of information. There are different policies and strategies to 
bring field knowledge into research programmes. According to both the Ethiopian and Nigerien government 
policies, farmers play a key role in identifying the problems and developing solutions. These policies also 
address farmers’ participation, however in practice there is limited participatory research. 

 

Nevertheless, agricultural research institutions have many approaches to bring field knowledge into their 
research agendas. For example there are Farmers Field Schools, farmer field surveys and there are the 
Research Extension Liaison Committee and the Farmers Research Group. Besides this NGOs have identical 
approaches, for example the Farmer-to-Farmer Program and the Sahel Oral History Project. Finally, some 
experts have an opinion about this. For example, Dr. Wellington Ekaya (RUFORUM) thinks capacity building is 
important and Fetien Abay (Mekelle University) argues that research should be focused on indigenous 
knowledge. 

 

To efficiently tackle dryland problems, there is a need for harmonization of policies and interventions in the 
field. At the government level of Ethiopia policies contradict each other, for instance the land tenure policy and 
the rural and agricultural development policy. Also when policies at national level are harmonized, fewer 
projects will be duplicating and overlapping. Research institutions were focussed on high productivity by using 
fertilizer. However, this response did not address the real problem of availability of water as crop failure can 
occur when there is drought and investments made by dryland farmers will not be recovered. 

 

An important issue to consider is that the challenges facing dryland agriculture are very diverse. Interventions 
should acknowledge the diversity of these challenges: both in terms of social perceptions of these problems, 
local agro-ecological conditions and economic realities. However, a general approach is needed in order to 
create a suitable environment for innovation and experimentation by farmers. This can be achieved by creating 
partnerships that combine actors from different levels (local, national, regional) and backgrounds (public, 
private etc.). When partnerships are made, the diverse and interlinked issues of dryland can be tackled more 
effectively. There are both international and local networks existing already, involving different actors. Networks 
should facilitate the interactive learning between researchers, other experts and farmers. 

 

Before the realisation of a partnership, some issues need to be assessed. It concerns the creation of nodes 
where partners meet, a change of attitude at universities and the scaling up of success stories. Despite the 
advantages of partnerships, there are also some risks in networks. Among these are the high costs, the threat 
that actors might prefer to work on their own terms and the reliance on personal contact and possible failure if 
power relations are not well managed. 

 

In general it can be said that the majority of the policies is focussed on a farmer participatory approach. 
However there is limited participatory research at the field level. There is no general solution that is applicable 
in all situations, due to a wide range of problems and different circumstances. 

 

 


9. Discussion 

Although the proposed questions were answered, there were some limitations in implementing the study. First 
of all there were sometimes problems with the language of different documents. While an initial search 
indicated there was enough information in English, it appeared later that the language was still a problem in 
some cases. For example, some of the policy documents and, NGO documents on Niger, were in French. Also 
one person could not give an answer to the questionnaire, because he could only answer in French. 

 

Besides the language barrier, some policy documents and research strategies were not available for Niger. For 
Ethiopia, many policies on agriculture in dryland are available; however this made it hard to select the most 
important ones. In order to get information about the general view of policies in the countries, we tried to 
contact the embassy of both Ethiopia and Niger in Brussels and the Dutch embassy in Ethiopia. We hoped they 
could attribute some criticisms about the practical implementation of policies. However, they did not respond to 
the questions. 

 

Another limitation in the study is the limited knowledge of some issues that are covered. For example, Ethiopia 
is covered quite well, since there were two Ethiopian team members who could have verified whether the most 
important issues were studied. In the case of Niger however, there was no frame of reference in order to 
assess whether all relevant dryland agriculture issues were addressed. 

 


10. Recommendations 

For further research some recommendations are made. 

 

Most policies of Niger are in French and not easily accessible. Since, the team lacked a francophone team 
member detailed investigation could not be done. Therefore, the recommendation is that further study should 
be carried out on policies of Niger concerning dryland research. 

 

Since the search on Ethiopian government policies was narrowed down in the project, it can be recommended 
that more time is invested in this. This could result in a much more complete overview of the policies. 

 

In this study not a lot of criticism is given on existing policies. Policy documents often have promising words, 
and therefore it would be interesting to focus on the evaluation of those policies. This might give a more 
realistic view on the impact of policies. 

 

Furthermore, it would be interesting to interview farmers in the countries. Through this an impression or 
practices at field level could be acquired. This would also allow a more complete overview of the linkages 
between farmers and other actors. 

 


List of Acronyms 

 

ADLI Agricultural Development Lead Industry 

CAADP Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 

CGIAR Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 

CRAN-GRN Collaborative Research Action Unit for the Management of Natural 
Resources Sahel International Niger 

CTA Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation 

Danida Danish International Development Assistance 

DMP Desert Margins Project 

EARO Ethiopian Agricultural Research Organization 

EARS Ethiopian Agricultural Research System 

EC European Commission 

ECD Economic Cooperation and Development 

EFARD European Forum on Agricultural Research for Development 

EIAR Ethiopia institutes of Agricultural Research 

EU European Union 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FARM-Africa Food & Agricultural Research Management – Africa 

FFS Farmer Field School 

FPR Farmer Participation Research 

FRG Farmers Research Group 

FTC Farmers training Centre 

FTF Farmer-to-Farmer 

GC Global Compact 

GCP Generation Challenge Programmes 

GTZ Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit 

ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas 

ICRAF International Center for Research in Agroforestry 

ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 

IDRC International Development Research Centre 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IIED International Institute for Environment and Development 

ILRI International Livestock Research Institute 


INRAN National Agricultural Research Institute of Niger 

INSAH Sahel Institute 

IRD Institute of Research for Development 

JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 

NARI National Agricultural Research Institutes 

NARS National Agricultural Research Systems 

NEPAD New Partnership for Africa’s Development 

NGO Non-Governmental Organization 

OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 

PFMP Participatory forest management program 

RELC Research Extension Liaison Committee 

RUFORUM Regional Universities Forum for Capacity Building in Agriculture 
(Kampala, Uganda) 

SCP Special country program 

SIDA Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 

SOHP Sahel Oral History Project 

UN United Nations 

UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 

UNSO United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

WARDA West Africa Rice Development Association 

WSSD World Summit on Sustainable Development 


References 

Abdoulaye, T. & Lowenberg-DeBoer, J. (2000) Intensification of Sahelian farming systems: evidence from 
Niger. Agricultural Systems, 64, 67-81. 

Abera, H., (2008) Adoption of improved tef and wheat production technologies in crop livestock mixed systems 
in Northern and western shewa Zones of Ethiopia, PhD thesis, Natural resource department of University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, viewed June 15, 2009, <http://upetd.up.ac.za/thesis/available/etd-
06092008133248/unrestricted/00front.pdf> 

AfDevInfo 2008, A Structured Database of African Development Information, UK, viewed 1 June 2009, 
< http://www.afdevinfo.com/htmlreports/org/org_67449.html> 

AfDevInfo 2008, A Structured Database of African Development Information, UK, viewed 1 June 2009, 
<http://www.afdevinfo.com/htmlreports/org/org_16672.html> 

Ahmed, M.M., Sanders, J.H. & Nell, W.T. (2000) New sorghum and millet cultivar introduction in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: impacts and research agenda. Agricultural Systems, 64, 55-65. 

Anderson, J., Bryceson, D., Campbell, B., Chitundu, D., Clarke, J., Drinkwater, M., Fakir, S., Frost, P. G. H., 
Gambiza, J. & Grundy, I. (2003) Chance, change and choice in Africa’s drylands: A new perspective on policy 
priorities. 

Asiabaka, C., (2002) Promoting Sustainable Extension Approaches: Farmer Field School (FFS)and its role in 
sustainable agricultural development in Africa, viewed 8 june 2009, 
<http://www.codesria.org/Links/conferences/ifs/Asiabaka.pdf> 

ASTI 2004, Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators survey data Niger AST Country Brief No. 24 
December 2004,viewed 5 june 2009. <http://www.asti.cgiar.org/pdf/Niger_CB24.pdf> 

Baidu-Forson, J. (1999) Factors influencing adoption of land-enhancing technology in the Sahel: lessons from a 
case study in Niger. Agricultural Economics, 20, 231-239. 

Beintema, N.M. and M.Solomon 2003, Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators, Ethiopia, ASTI Country 
Brief No. 9, Viewed 17 2009, <http://www.asti.cgiar.org/pdf/Ethiopia_CB9.pdf>. 

Casas, J; Solh, M and Hafez,H, 1999. The National Agricultural Research Systems in the West Asia andNorth 
Africa Region. ICARDA, Aleppo, Syria, December 1999. viewed 5 June 2009, 
<http://www.icarda.org/NARS/Ethiopia.PDF> 

Clark, N. (2001) Innovation systems, institutional change and the new knowledge market: implications for Third 
World agricultural development. Discussion Paper. INTECH. 

CTA (2009) Smart marketing. Spore 140, available online at: 
<http://spore.cta.int/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=808&catid=9&lang=en> 

Cunningham, P. J. & Abasse, T. (2005) Reforesting the Sahel: farmer managed natural regeneration. 
Domestications des especes agroforestieres au sahel: situation actuelle et perspectives. ICRAF Working 
Paper, 5, 75–80. 

Danida 2009, Farmer Empowerment Experiences, lessons learned and ways forward Case Presentation at 
Neuchatèl Initiative Annual Meeting 2004, viewed 12 June 2009, 
<http://www.neuchatelinitiative.net/english/FarmerEmpowermentexperienceslessonslearnedandwaysf.DOC>. 

Danida 2009, Networks, viewed 15June 2009, <https://www.comminit. com/en/drum_ beat_57.html >. 

Dar, W.D. (2007), What ICRISAT Thinks…: There is Hope and Prosperity in the Drylands, Andhra Pradesh, 
India: International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid tropics 


Dar, W. D. & Twomlow, S. J. (2007) Managing agricultural intensification: The role of international research. 
Crop Protection, 26, 399-407. 

Eden foundation (1999) : Passive Transfer - the Eden experience in Niger , viewed 15 June 2009, 
<http://www.edenfoundation.org/project/seminars_ipalac.html> 

EFARD (European Forum on Agricultural Research for Development), 2002, Dryland rehabilitation using agro-
forestry systems in the tropics (DRYRAST), EC. <http://cordis.europa.eu/eoi/docs/int_30966.doc> 

Ejigu, J. and Waters-Bayer, A. (2005), Unlocking Farmers’ Potential Institutionalising farmer participatory 
research and extension in Southern Ethiopia, 

FARM-Africa viewed 15 July 2009<http://africandowry.org/documents/121.PDF> 

EIAR 2009, Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute, Addis Abeba, viewed 4 June2009, 
<http://www.eiar.gov.et> 

EIAR 2008, Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute, Addis Abeba, viewed 4 June 2009, 
<http://www.eiar.gov.et/news> 

EIAR 2008, Project on Strengthening Technology Development, Verification, Transfer and Adoption through 
Farmer Research Groups, Addis Abeba , viewed 8 June 2009, 
<http://www.eiar.gov.et/publ/FRG_Update/No1.pdf> 

European Commission, Water for life, viewed 8 June2009,<http://ec.europa.eu/research/water-
initiative/countries_en.cfm> 

European Commission (2002), European Commission Life sciences and biotechnology A strategy for Europe, 
EC: Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 46 pp. viewed 8 June2009, 
<http://ec.europa.eu/biotechnology/pdf/com2002- 27_en.pdf> 

Evenson, R. E. & Gollin, D. (2003) Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to 2000. Science, 300, 
758-762. 

FARM-Africa 2009, viewed 15 June 2009, <http://www.farmafrica.org.uk/> 

Freeman, H.A. (2001) Comparison of farmer-participatory research methodologies: case studies In Malawi and 
Zimbabwe. Working Paper Series no. 10. Nairobi, Kenya: Socioeconomics and Policy Program, International 
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, viewed 15 June 2009, 
<http://www.icrisat.org/text/pubs/digital_pubs/J1030_2001.pdf > 

Gebremedhin,B., J.Pender and S.Ehui (2003) Land Tenure and Land Management in the Highlands of 
Northern Ethiopia, Ethiopian Journal of Economics, VIII(2):46-63. Addis Abeba 

Gebreselassie,S. (2006), Land, Land Policy and Smallholder Agriculture in Ethiopia Options and Scenarios. 
Future agriculture. Viewed 19 may 2009, <http://www.futureagricultures.org/pdf%20files/SG_paper_2.pdf>. 

Gilbert, E., Navin, R., Alex, G., Benschoter, E., Cullen, A. and Flannery, R. (2005) Managing international 
volunteer programs, USAID, viewed 11 June 2009, < http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADC356.pdf> 

Global Mechanism of the UNCCD, TerrAfrica: Country Engagement Strategy, TerrAfrica, viewed June 11, 
2009, <http://earthmind.net/slm/docs/terrafrica-2006-country-engagement-strategy.pdf > 

GTZ 2009, GTZ, viewed 11 June 2009, <http://www.gtz.de/en/index.htm 
<http://pdf.dec.org/pdf_docs/PNADC356.pdf> 

Gabre-Madhin, E. Z. & Haggblade, S. (2004) Successes in African Agriculture: Results of an Expert Survey. 
World Development, 32, 745-766. 


GL-CRSP (2005) Annual Report 2005. Global Livestock Collaborative Research Support Programme. viewed 1 
June 2009, <http://glcrsp.ucdavis.edu/ publications/ ar05/glcrsp_ ar05_appendix.pdf> 

Haggblade, H., Tembo, G. & Donovan, C. (2003a) Household level financial incentives to adoption of 
conservation agricultural technologies in Africa. Working Paper. Food Security Research Project, viewed 2 
June 2009,<http://aec.msu.edu/fs2/zambia/wp9zambia.pdf> 

Haggblade, S., Hazell, P., Kirsten, I. & Mkandawire, R. (2003b) African Agriculture: Past Performance, Future 
Imperatives Paper presented at the conference: “Successes in African Agriculture”. Pretoria, South Africa, 
December 1-3, 2003. viewed 1 June 2009 
<http://www.ifpri.org/events/conferences/2003/120103/papers/paper2.pdf> 

Hall, A., Bockett, G., Taylor, S., Sivamohan, M. V. K. & Clark, N. (2001) Why Research Partnerships Really 
Matter: Innovation Theory, Institutional Arrangements and Implications for Developing New Technology for the 
Poor. World Development, 29, 783-797. 

Hilario, F.A. (2007) Team ICRISAT Champions The Poor. Andhra Pradesh, India: International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics. 

ICARDA (2009a), Research mandate, ICARDA, viewed 10 June 2009 <http://www.icarda.org/Mandate.htm>. 

ICARDA (2009b), Regional programs, ICARDA, viewed 10 June 2009 
<http://www.icarda.org/IntlCoop_NVRSRP.htm> 

ICARDA (2008), Monitoring of the European Commission Support to Strategic Agricultural Research through 
the CGIAR Centres for Food Insecure Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Latin America, and West 
Asia/North Africa Regions, by R. Lamboll and J Pham. Viewed June 112009, 
http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/where/worldwide/food-security/documents/icarda_finalreport_en.pdf> 

ICARDA (2007a), ICARDA Medium Term Plan 2008-2010, ICARDA, viewed 8 June 2009 
<http://www.icarda.org/MTP2008-10.htm>. 

ICARDA (2007b), Project 8: Poverty and Livelihood Analysis and Impact Assessment in Dry Areas,In: ICARDA 
Medium Term Plan 2008-2010, ICARDA, viewed 8 June 2009 <http://www.icarda.org/MTP_08-
10/Project8.pdf>. 

ICARDA (1999). The National Agricultural Research Systems of Ethiopia. Viewed, May 20,2009 
<http://www.icarda.org> 

ICRISAT 2006, ICRISAT’s Vision and Strategy to 2015, ICRISAT, viewed 6 June 2009 
<http://www.icrisat.org/vision/contents.htm>. 

ICRISAT 2004, The Desert Margins Program, ICRISAT, viewed 10 June 2009, <http://www.dmpafrica.net/ >. 

ICRAF 2008. World Agroforestry Center 2008Transforming Lives and Landscapes Strategy 2008- 2015 
,viewed 5 June 2009, <http://www.worldagroforestry .org/af1 /fileadmin/Strategy doc.pdf>. 

ICRAF 2006, world agroforestery West Africa dryland project, viewed 4 June 2009, 
<http://www.worldagroforestry.org/wadrylands/index.html> 

IDRC 2009, Rhiannon Barker and Nigel Cross, Documenting Oral History in the African Sahel, 
S0S Sahel UK, London, UK., viewed 12 June 2009, < http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-43109-201-1-DO_TOPIC.html>. 

IFAD 2009, Agricultural and Rural Rehabilitation and Development Initiative Project – Institutional 
Strengthening Component (Maradi-region) (ARRDIISC), viewed 13 June 
2009,<http://operations.ifad.org/web/ifad/operations/country/project/tags/niger/1443/project%20overview>. 

IFAD 2009,Project for Promotion of local initiative for Development in Aguié, viewed 13 June 
2009,<http://operations.ifad.org/web/ifad/operations/country/home/tags/niger>. 


IFAD 2005, The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Special Country Programme Phase II (SCPII) Interim 
Evaluation, viewed 14 June2009, 
<http://www.ifad.org/evaluation/public_html/eksyst/doc/profile/pf/ethiopia.htm>. 

IFAD 1998, The Niger Special Country Programme - Phase 2 (PSN-II).Scouting and Sharing Innovation in 
Western and Central Africa, Tassa and soil fertility in Niger Tassa techniques for soil fertility ,Rome: IFAD, 
viewed 12 June 2009,< http://fao08.fidafrique.net/Fiche85-IFAD-PPILDA-SoilFertily-Niger.pdf>. 

ILRI 2009, LivestockFarmerField Schools, Nairobi, viewed 5 June 2009, <http://www.ilri.org>. 

ILRI 2009, International Livestock research Institution .Livestock a pathway out of poverty ILRI’S Research 
Strategy to 2010, International Livestock research Institution, viewed 5 June 2009 
<http://www.ilri.org/Strategic/toc.html >. 

ILRI 2008, International Livestock research Institution annual report 2007. International Livestock research 
Institution, viewed 5 June 2009, <http://www.ilri.org/Link/Files/ILRI/AnnualReport2007>. 

Kaboré, D. & Reij, C. (2004) The emergence and spreading of an improved traditional soil and water 
conservation practice in Burkina Faso. EPTD Discussion Paper IFPRI, viewed 5 June 2009, < 
http://www.ifpri.org/divs/eptd/dp/papers/eptdp114.pdf>. 

Ke Tchuda Juna, H. B. (2000), Strength in Unity, Shared Management of common Property Resources. A Case 
Study from Takieta, Niger, (G. & K. Vogt, 2000, SOS Sahel International UK, ed.), viewed 12 June 2009, 
<http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00002881/01/iied_001_smcprfinalreport.pdf>. 

Lamboll, R. and Pham, J. (2008) Final Report ICARDA - Project MP2: Integrated Gene Management: 
Conservation, Enhancement and Utilization of Agrobiodiversity in Dry Areas now named Biodiversity and 
Integrated Gene Management, Monitoring of the European Commission Support to Strategic Agricultural 
Research through the CGIAR Centres for Food Insecure Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Latin America, 
and West Asia/North Africa Regions. 

Mazzucato, V., Niemeijer, D., Stroosnijder, L. & Roling, N. (2001) Social networks and the dynamics of soil and 
water conservation in the Sahel, Gatekeeper series 101, IIED. Available online at: viewed 12 June 2009 
<http://library.wur.nl/file/wurpubs/LUWPUBRD_00120651_A502_001.pdf>. 

Maendeleo Agricultural Technology Fund (MATF) and Food & Agricultural Research Management-Africa 
(FARM-Africa) (2007) Improving Livelihoods Through Innovative Partnerships, Development Communications 
Ltd. 

Ministry of information press and audiovisual department (2001). The government of the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia Rural Development Policies, Strategies and Instruments. Addis Abeba. 

Neef, A. (2000) Land rights and soil fertility management in Niger IN F. Graef, Lawrence, P. & Oppen, M. V. 
(Eds.) Adapted Farming in West Africa: Issues, Potentials and Perspectives Stuttgart, Germany, Verlag Ulrich 
E. Grauer. 

Office of the Prime Minister Permanent secretariat of the PRSP (2002). Poverty Reduction Strategies, Niamey, 
viewed 15 May 2009, <http://planipolis.iiep.unesco.org/upload/Niger/PRSP/Niger%20PRSP.pdf>. 

Omamo, S. W. (2003) Policy research on African agriculture: trends, gaps and challenges. ISNAR Research 
Report, 21 < http://www.ifpri.org/isnararchive/publications/pdf/RR-21.pdf>. 

Ooijen, R. and Coombs, D. (2007): Evaluation of EC Contribution to the Consultative Group on International 
Agricultural Research (CGIAR) Final Report (Volume I), report for the EC, Rotterdam.< 
http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/where/worldwide/food-security/documents/final_report_cgiar_evaluation_en.pdf>. 

Reij, C. P. & Smaling, E. M. A. (2008) Analyzing successes in agriculture and land management in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Is macro-level gloom obscuring positive micro-level change? Land Use Policy, 25, 410-420. 


Sanders, J. H. & Shapiro, B. I. (2003) Crop technology introduction in semiarid West Africa: performance and 
future strategy. Journal of Crop Production, 9, 559-592. 

SIDA (1997), Development of dryland areas - Sida’s response to the Convention to Combat Desertification, By 
P. Rudebjer. viewed 11 June 2009, <http://www.unccd.int/cop/reports/developed/2000/sweden-eng.pdf>. 

SOS Sahel 2009, Positive Future for DryLand Africa , Women’s Empowerment, viewed 11 June 2009, 
<http://www.sahel.org.uk/women.html>. 

SOS Sahel mission 2009 viewed 12 June 2009,< http://www.sahel.org.uk/about.html>. 

SOS Sahel international Niger 2009, West Africa, viewed 12 June 2009,<http://www.sahel.org.uk/niger.html>. 

SOS Sahel Ethiopia 2009, Joint Participatory Forest Management Programme, FARM-Africa & SOS Sahel 
Ethiopia, viewed 13 June 2009,< http://www.pfmp-farmsos.org/ >. 

Spielman,j.D, K.E.Davis, M.Negash and G.Ayele 2008, Rural Innovation Systems and Networks, findings from 
a study of Ethiopian smallholders, IFPRI Discussion Paper 00759, CIGAR, viewed15 May 
2009,<http://www.ifpri.org/pubs/dp/ifpridp00759.pdf>. 

Stads G.J M.H.Kabaley and M. Gandah(2004).Agricultural science and technology indicators, Niger, Asti 
Country brief No.24, viewed may 20 2009, <http://www.asti.cgiar.org/pdf/Niger_CB24.pdf>. 

Technical Advisory Service 2004, Farmer Empowerment Experiences, lessons learned and ways forward 
Danida, viewed 16 June 2009, <http://www.diis.dk/graphics/Events, /2004/FarmerEmpowermentVol1Final.pdf 
>. 

TerrAfrica 2005, Module 3 – Business Planning Framework, TerrAfrica, viewed 11 June 2009, 
<http://www.terrafrica.org/file_ view. asp?tbl= 1130d4334i58&fid=3081018&mt= application/pdf>. 

TerrAfrica 2009, viewed 11 June 2009, <http://www.terrafrica.org/default.asp?pid=6121789>. United Nations 
Global Compact 2009, United Nations, viewed 11 June 2009, 
<http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/>. 

UNDP (2008) Statistics: Human Development Report, viewed 15 June 2009 <http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/>. 

USAID 2009, viewed 11 June 2009, <http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/agricuture/>. 

U.S. Agency for International Development 2009, viewed 15 June 2009, 
<http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/agriculture/>. 

Valentina, M. and Samba, L. (1994) An Economic Analysis of Research and Technology Transfer of Millet, 
Sorghum, and Cowpeas in Niger MSU International Department of Agricultural Economics Development 
Department of Economics Working Paper No. 40 Michigan State University 1994 East Lansing, 
Michigan48824, viewed June 1 2009, <http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/11271/1/idp22.pdf>. 

Vens, T. (2008), EC, viewed June 11, 2009, <http://ec.europa.eu/development/ 
geographical/regionscountries/countries/country_profile.cfm?cid=et&lng=en&CFID=3095767& 
CFTOKEN=93314304& jsessionid=0806173fcc0c57736b46>. 

World Bank 2009, TerrAfrica Halting Land Degradation, World Bank viewed 11 June 2009, 
<http://go.worldbank.org/POXJ3GR2Q0 >. 

 


Annex A 

 

Questionnaire about developing an African-European partnership on dryland research 

Dear …….., 

CTA gave us your email address to be able to send you this questionnaire. We are a group of MSc-students 
from Wageningen University taking the Academic Consultancy Training course. The main objective of our 
assignment is to come up with a policy position addressing the need for development of African-European 
partnership on dryland issues. 

The policy position will contain arguments and recommendations to address these questions: How to bring the 
knowledge at field level into research programmes? Is there a need for harmonization of policies and 
interventions in the field? How to set up a more concerted network between policies, research programmes and 
interventions in the field? 

The policy position will be formulated for two dryland regions in the countries Ethiopia (Tigray, Afar and Somali) 
and Niger (Pastoral, agro-pastoral and rain-fed agriculture zones). We are investigating existing policies and 
programmes on dryland issues, at both international and regional levels. Our strategy will be to keep the 
concept of ‘dryland issues’ as broad as possible to keep an open mind and identify issues that might become 
more important in the future, for instance in relation to climate change. We hope you are available to answer 
our questions. We preferable receive your answers before Friday the 5th of June. We advise you to try to stick 
to maximum 3 pages. You are welcome to attach literature documents. 

Is there, in your opinion, a gap between knowledge at field level research programmes? How would you 
describe it? Is there only a gap concerning specific issues? 

What options doe you see to bring field knowledge into research? What tools are used for this? What is the role 
of NGOs in this? 

Which dryland issues are the main focus of research and which have priority for farmers? 

For which dryland issues is an African-European partnership most needed? 

What partnerships do you see at the moment? What are you ideas for improvement? 

What success stories of African-European partnership on dryland issues do you know? 

Can we contact you if we have any more questions? 

Thank you very much, we appreciate you took the time to contribute to our project. 


Response from Dr. Wellington Ekaya, RUFORUM, 15-6-09 

Is there, in your opinion, a gap between knowledge at field level and research program? 

Definitely there are gaps. 

How would you describe it? 

It will vary from region to region, but from my point of view the main challenges are: 

The often weak link between extension service and research within the National Agricultural Research System. 
The linkage is particularly weak when one looks at the amount of research conducted by universities in Africa 
and how much of that is linking to extension – very little linkage. This can be attributed to a number of reasons: 

Extension service is normally Government funded – in most cases the service is underfunded by government 
and therefore rendered ineffective. 

Often times researchers, at some point in their research career, do not focus on the importance of matching 
their research efforts with the realities on the ground (dryland communities). For a long time particularly in the 
1970s to early 1980s (in East Africa for example), dryland management and research was driven based on 
models mainly from the ranches of USA and Australia.- BOX?? The local knowledge existing among the 
dryland peoples, which had enabled them live for centuries was often seen as primitive, backward, lacking 
scientific basis, and not 

Traditional (community) institutions are a key driver of dryland management in Africa. These institutions are 
very often ignored or never understood by researchers. The institutions and structure are very important in 
terms of identifying the research demand and disseminating research findings, measuring impact, etc. 

There is a large amount of good research done and published. However, the challenge is that the information 
does not trickle down to where it is most needed and in the right form. Thousands of research papers exist, but 
these are found in journals and books which are not read by policy makers, NGO workers, and communities. 

Generally the capacity to translate dryland research findings into development is still very low in Africa. A lot of 
good research is done but the findings only remain at journal article level. This has very limited circulation and 
further the knowledge is not very useful at field level. 

Is there only a gap concerning specific issues? I don’t understand the question... 

What options do you see to bring field knowledge into research? 

Build capacity within the dryland communities themselves so that they can advance their own course in terms 
of research, so that they can set the research agenda in the drylands of Africa, so that they can be at the fore 
front of demonstrating the potential of drylands. 

Engage policy makers at national and international levels to appreciate the plight of dryland communities, the 
potential of drylands, and the need to invest in Africa’s drylands. 

Enhanced networking among individuals, NGOs, funding agencies, research institutions, etc working in the 
drylands. 

What tools are used for this? What is the role of NGOs in this? 

Which dryland issues is the main focus of research and which have priority for farmers? 

There is a good amount of research going on (and has been going on) focussing on dryland livelihoods. There 
are various aspects ranging from livestock improvement to climate change adaptation and resilience. All these 
are important for dryland farmers and it is really difficult to draw a general priority list. However, what is 
important is that whatever research that we do, must be demand driven, we involve the ultimate consumers, we 
disseminate and we link it to policy, by communicating in a language that policy makers will understand. 

 For which dryland issues is an African-European partnership most needed? 

1. The area of capacity building, for example: 

Postgraduate training 


Short specialized skill enhancement courses 

Student and researcher exchange programmes for knowledge and experience sharing 

2. Joint research projects 

 What partnerships do you see at the moment? What are you ideas for improvement? 

I would need more time to research on this, but at the moment: 

RUFORUM is developing partnership with the NATURA network of universities for purposes of enhancing the 
quality of postgraduate training in Dryland Resources Management. 

The AIDA project is a model African-European partnership. As partners we need to draw some lessons and 
plough them into the original ideas/proposal than work on a next phase, building on our achievements in the 
first phase. 

What success stories of African-European partnership on dryland issues do you know? 

AIDA Project – This is the first that comes to m mind since I participated in the project right from writing the 
proposal to implementation 

Sida/SAREC Regional Land and Water Management initiative in Eastern Africa 

The Pastoral Information Network Programme 

The works of International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) dryland initiatives in Africa 


Response from Tesfay Belay, Tigray agricultural Research Institute, Mekelle, Ethiopia, 
8-6-09 

Is there, in your opinion, a gap between knowledge at field level research programmes? How would you 
describe it? 

Yes, the gap of knowledge at field level research programmes is the fact that the real problems of farmers in 
drylands are not particularly and satisfactorily addressed. The gap can also be expressed in limited capacity of 
researchers to solve these problems. 

Is there only a gap concerning specific issues? 

The gap is not only concerning specific issues. I can say the gap in knowledge is related to incapacities of the 
research programmes and the government to satisfactorily address the main problems found in the dry land 
areas. Research institutes for example are not in a position to answer problems of food insecurity faced by 
communities living in the dry lands. The communities’ involvement in the management of their natural 
resources particularly their forest and soil resources are minimal and there are no concerted efforts to 
thoroughly raise the awareness of the dry land communities. For example communities living in dry land areas 
of Tigray and Afar depend very much on aggressively utilizing the remaining forest resources for charcoal 
making without giving any attention to replanting of trees. 

There are of course a number of policies that aim at preserving and conserving the existing forest resources in 
our area but there is no one to implement them. 

 What options doe you see to bring field knowledge into research? What tools are used for this? What 
is the role of NGOs in this? 

The key to success in bringing field knowledge into research and practice will be to give due emphasis to 
efforts that bring the dry land communities or the owners of the resources and the associated problems to the 
picture and to their active participation. 

Tools required include development of policies and guidelines with the active participation of the communities, 
awareness raising, training and educating of the communities at the grassroots level. 

The role of NGOs can be in motivating the active participation of the communities, awareness raising, training, 
and educating of the communities. But NGOs in our case are a bit limited in showing impacts on communities. 

 Which dryland issues are the main focuses of research and which have priority for farmers? 

Dryland issues have not received enough attention in policy formulations and are only recently that there are 
some efforts that focus on pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of our country. There are also dry land areas 
outside of the pastoral and agro-pastoral areas and are often treated with like other potential areas of Ethiopia 
in all aspects of policy formulation. There is therefore a need to address these areas too as they are highly 
populated even compared to the pastoral and agro-pastoral areas. 

Specific issues that need to be addressed in dry land research in our area should be how to increase moisture 
availably in the dry land areas. This could be focused in different topics like identification of trees that suit to the 
dry lands, development of technology packages that address moisture deficit in the dry lands, identification of 
other resources that could address investment into the dry lands, efforts towards decreasing the livestock 
number while increasing productivity in the dry lands, increased funding of research in the drylands etc. 

For which dryland issues is an African-European partnership most needed? 

An African-european partnership is required in the identification of trees that suit to the drylands, development 
of technology packages that address moisture deficit in the drylands, identification of other resources that lead 
to increased investment in the drylands, efforts towards decreasing the livestock number while increasing 
productivity in the drylands and increased funding for dryland research. 

What partnerships do you see at the moment? What are you ideas for improvement? 

There are a number of African-European partnerships on-going in our area in higher education institutions, 
development projects and a number NGO driven projects. Those in the area of higher education institutions 
mainly target capacity building and research on dry land problems. The one on capacity building can be 
considered critical for they are contributing to the critical mass of people with second and terminal degrees. But 


the research component in the higher learning institutions is not contributing towards solutions to the dry land 
areas and rather it is limited to only satisfying the academic interest of the researchers. 

There is therefore a need for improvement as regards increased funding for research and also the need to be 
product oriented or solving the problems of the dry land community. The need for measurable indicators of 
success is very important. 

What success stories of African-European partnership on dryland issues do you know? 

There are many programs of partnership between African and European institutions but is difficult to mention 
one as a complete success story. There are of course bits and pieces of efforts here and there. 


Response from Dr. Abay Fetien Abera, Mekelle University, Ethiopia, 12-06-09 

Is there, in your opinion, a gap between knowledge at field level research programmes? yes How 
would you describe it? 

There is a lot of indigenous knowledge and lessons from nature that need to be studied in the area of Plant 
genetic resources, Land management indigenous trees, shrubs and bushes with respect to their use, 
management and production potential. It is estimated that around 12% of out 6500 to 7000 of the higher plants 
are endemic, and with the forest cover estimated to be around 3%, these endemic plants are in grave danger of 
disappearance even before their potential is well studied, though in most cases local people know and use 
them. 

 Is there only a gap concerning specific issues? 

Issues on wildlife conservation and ecotourism biodiversity management No the science of biodiversity, effect 
of climate change on biodiversity, forestry, especially that of dryland forestry is in its infancy in Ethiopia, thus 
there is need for research in an all encompassing aspect. 

What options doe you see to bring field knowledge into research? 

The first and foremost priority should be conservation of this unique biodiversity and the local knowledge about 
it. 

What tools are used for this? 

Focus needs to be given to local use, like fuel wood, fodder, bee forage, medicinal value and income 
generation with respect to these plants. 

•Raising the awareness of the local people through education. 

•Participating the people on the research conducted 

•Giving Incentives 

What is the role of NGOs in this? 

NGO’s can be actively involved in the development, management and promotion of products from these plants 
both at local and international levels. 

Which dryland issues are the main focuses of research? Which dryland issues have priority for 
farmers? 

Focus needs to be given to local use, like fuel wood, fodder, bee forage, medicinal value and income 
generation with respect to these plants. Recognition should be given to their selection criteria and knowledge. 
Their strategy to adapt the changing environment should be given recognition and incorporated in research 
agenda 

For which dry land issues is an African-European partnership most needed? 

In documenting, conserving and promoting the use and management of these endemic species. 

What partnerships do you see at the moment? 

There is a lot of focus on already studied high value plants like Jatropha, … all which are exotic. I am not 
objecting to these projects, but a lot of biodiversity is being lost with no serious study on the potential of them 
for medicine, food, fodder, fuel, 

What are you ideas for improvement? 

Collaborative work in the area of documenting, conserving, sustainable using and managing, there resources 
with the promotion of high potential plants when found. 

What success stories of African-European partnership on dryland issues do you know? 


VILIR funded Forest Rehabilitation Project; ISWC; Indigenous Soil and Water Conservation Project) in 
promoting farmers innovation in land management. NORAD and NUFU (Norwegian Research Higher education 
support) on Participatory Barley Breeding in low input areas. 

Can we contact you if we have any more questions? 

Yes 

Do they function in Ethiopia? Spread over the country? 

Yes they function depending on the methodological approach of the activities. For example when you have 
participatory research with farmers --those farmers given the name farmer research group to identify from the 
non experimenters. in Some are they use the term farmers field school. FTC is available all over the country 
and functioning with different efficiencies 

In Pastoralist areas they also function and known as PTC (Pastoral Training Center) focused on pastoral 
livelihood and they also have TVET at Gowane. 

Who is responsible? 

The bureau of agriculture is responsible and In Afar region the bureau pastoral and agricultural development is 
responsible 

Vocational training school is job oriented training- e.g -skill training technical training is broader training which 
contributes to the capacity of existing staff. 


Response from Djibo Hamidou, AGRYMET, Niger, 4-06-09 and 19-06-09 

I would like to share some thougths with you and your classmates in giving the informations on what we 
understand by drylands in Agriculture in Africa. 

According to Mary Tiffen, 2001, resource in many parts of dryland Africa most suitable land is already farmed 
due to the expansion of rural populations. This means that land has become a scarce resource. Those who 
want to enlarge a farm do so by buying or renting in land, in some extreme cases, if sufficiently powerful, 
grabbing or confiscating it In such areas fallowing land is no longer possible. To maintain fertility, farmers have 
to turn to other strategies like manuring or using chemical fertilisers. Besides, there is also little land available 
for communal grazing, except perhaps on roadside verges. Crop residues and the dry season weed growth 
have become the value personal property of the cultivator. This is now the position in all areas where the 
population has risen above 40 persons per km2. Cultivable dryland is scarce, and farm holdings are getting 
smaller. Grazing resources are under increasing pressure and soils are being severely affected by salinity due 
to intensive irrigation. The list of challenges is long. 

From a global perspective, the following key reasons justify the concern for drylands: People living in drylands 
constitue a large fraction of the world’s poorest. According to United Nations Development Fund (UNDP’s) 
Human development Index, over 50% of the world’s most disadvantaged countries are in dryland Africa. 
Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG’s) becomes highly unlikely, unless poverty reduction 
is significantly realized in drylands 

Strategies for developing Dryland agriculture: Role of knowledge. 

Dr. Wellington Ekaya one of our AIDA expert partner from the University of Nairobi pointed out some strategies: 

Potential strategies: 

* improve knowledge of drylands and the indigenous communities including traditional agricultural practices 

* improve research-extension-farmer (community) linkages and co-operation 

* integrate traditional knowledge with innovative technology 

* improve stakeholders participation in research, extension, training, awareness and education programmes 
(e;g gender, youth, indigenous communities). 

Likely determinants of success of failure: 

• measurable impact and uptake of extension, training and demonstrations conducted at farmer level / 
indigenous communities 

• number and involvement of farmers / community leaders used as trainers 

• number of women and youth involved and impact of their participation 

• use of low-impact, simple and self-sustainable technology linked to community knowledge systems 

• extent to which extension interventions are adapted to local needs, level of skills and capacity of follow-up 
through farm tests and pilot schemes 

• extent to which indigenous communities are encouraged to innovate on their own 

• how readily researchers and research results are integrated into communities and policies. 

 

Then Dr. Wellington came up with the conclusion that policy plays a key role in ensuring that people invest in 
using available resources sustainably to improve their livelihoods. Large scale policies have generally not 
worked because they were relied on imported blue prints that lacked the flexibility that people need to survive 
and prosper in such regions. People indigenous knowledge is a valuable resource for managing highly variable 
and risky environments and building on such knowledge can help identify policies, research priorities for the 
scientific community and sustainable practices for the resource users. 

The responsibility for deciding the future of dry land natural resource management must remain with dry land 
household: and scientists and policymakers are encouraged to work closely with them to achieve sustainable 


impact. Can drylands people, against all odds, reduce poverty and food insecurity, and attain sustainable 
livelihoods with the support of the scientific community in consultation with policymakers? 

About Farmers' organizations, 

The development strategies of national governments and other donors often include the strengthening of 
farmers' organizations (FOs) as one of their aims. This reflect a desire to involve communities in defining and 
implementing their own rural development and their own strategies to alleviate poverty. Denis Pesche ( 2002) 
argues that the range of their services and their sizeable contribution to general welfare justifies efforts to 
ensure that they are properly funded from north public and private sources. 

The 1980s and 1990s were years of growth for farmers' organizations in developing countries, both at local 
level and higher ( national and international, with FO federations and networks). FOs perform many roles, 
generally combining a number of different functions. This is either because of deficiencies in their environment 
or because a combination of roles is necessary if they are to provide their members with services and at the 
same time achieve a higher national political profile. Also, a farmers' organization that is too specialised can be 
vulnerable in the unstable environment of rural affairs in developing countries. 

Farmers' organizations frequently perform three major roles. 

* the first is to provide services to their members: thes may be technical promoting technical innovation to 
improve their members' income) or economic (FOs may be full economic operators through the harvesting and 
marketing of their produce or the supply of agricultural inputs). 

* The second is to represent their members' interests and, more widely, the interests of farmers and others 
living in rural areas ( without their having necessarily to be members of the FO). This role may have many 
facets, including the formulation of claims in negotiations, drawing-up proposals to contribute to the definition of 
agricultural and rural policies, and involvement in the management of agricultural sectors. 

* Finally they may also be involved in local development, providing social investment ( schools, health centres, 
literacy programmes and so one). So, given the shortfall in state or local and community services, they provide 
amenities that everyone needs. By being active in this area FOs also help strengthen local democracy and 
participation. I think that these statements will help in understanding the roles of FOs in developing countries 
since the years eighties. 


Annex B 

Interview with Dr. Ir. André de Jager 

28-05-2009 (via Skype) 

Introduction 

André de Jager is a researcher at the Dutch Agricultural Economics Research Institute (LEI-WUR). 

He has ample experience in Ethiopia, particularly in supply chains. 

He also indicated he was familiar with agricultural research in the country, such as at the Ethiopian Agricultural 
Research Institute Organization (EARO, now EIAR). He thinks the gap between research and field is 
enormous. 

Food security in the drylands 

Mr. De Jager identified three separate regions/groups of farmers within Ethiopia: 

Marginal Areas: These areas have structural problems, with very little room for improvement. These areas will 
always remain dependent on food from outside for their food security. 

Economic Growth Areas: These areas have room for improvement: they are mostly self-sufficient in their food 
supply. Research is being done for this group, in areas such as improved (e.g. teff and maize) and improved 
dairy farming. 

Top group: This is a group of farmers that can export to world markets, in high-value crops such as flowers. 
Research for this group is also weak. 

In general, the research being done used to be very academic, each discipline doing their own things. The 
research is mostly limited to on-station research, very little dissemination of knowledge. This has changed 
somewhat, now it is more multi-disciplinary. 

Firstly, these areas face structural problems, such as climate etc. These are exogenous, outside the control of 
research. 

Supply chains are poorly developed. Farmers are unable to get proper inputs, and get their outputs where 
demand is greatest. 

Then there is the low level of entrepreneurship in Ethiopia. This manifests it self at the farm; farmers do not 
seek new products, new markets to serve. But input and output markets are also functioning poorly, because 
there are few buyers/suppliers. This is changing slowly. 

Poor infrastructure also limits agricultural possibilities. 

Technology 

Technological constraints 

Every region has different constraints, general areas: 

The starting material of the farmers needs be good. A lot of research goes into this. 

Agronomic practices are not always optimal: application of fertilizer etc. Some areas are over-fertilized, while 
others are under-fertilized. More research needs to go into this. 

Chains need to be improved; post-harvest technology is at a low level. This leads to losses, especially with 
perishable crops. 


Contribution of research 

Research is not specific enough, only blanket recommendations are made. This is not effective because: 

Every area has specific varieties that are best suited to local circumstances. 

Agronomic practices are different everywhere, research fails to take this into account. 

An essential component that is lacking is marketing research, to improve the chains. 

Up scaling 

Jeffrey Sach’s Millennium Villages (MV), aimed at specific villages to showcase that technology can help when 
properly applied. The structural problems are not addressed in these; they only affect a few villages, in which all 
inputs etc. are made available. But the problem facing most Ethiopian farmers is that they do not have access 
to these inputs. This means that there is no way to upscale the findings from these villages to the entire 
country. 

Partnerships 

Many problems emerged during the conversation, and some hints at solutions. These solutions focused on 
getting people together in a “partnership” to work at a specific problem. So what would such a partnership look 
like? 

You need your extension workers, researchers, and local farmer organizations together. Combined with this 
you need input suppliers, marketers and NGOs. This way you get a public-private partnership. How to create 
these is not simple. There are no answers on how to do this. 

The problem in creating these partnerships is the low level of organization in Ethiopia. Farmers co-operatives 
do not exist. 

NGOs do try to get around this, but their projects are usually nothing more than pilot projects, with little way of 
up-scaling the findings. 

So you need a more original approach, such as farmer schools, in which farmers, input supplier, marketers etc. 
get together to exchange ideas. This could be started anywhere these people get together, such as at local 
markets. 


Interview Ken Giller 

28-05-2009 

Question 1. Can you introduce yourself? 

Specialization in plant production system to increase productivity and crop life-stock system, besides that he is 
a rangeland expert. He tries understand complexity farms system and the different goals of people .. that 
requires different types of expertise and research. Little work directly in Niger, more in Mali (wetter part). Book 
‘From management in mixed crops livestock systems in the northern highlands of Ethiopia’ about Tigray (more 
crops that live at higher altitudes, water problems, drought problems) .. however it is relevant area for us 

Question 2. What is the focus of research in dryland? 

first should define dryland? CTA:100-1000 mm. He says, semi arid: >700mm, and arid: >400mm, also irregular 
rainfall .. seasonality is important, main characteristic: 1 long dry season. different types of research: 
economics, climate change (variability), soil fertility (his interest). constraints because of soil fertility, limit of 
rainfall on top of that. title of book he used: ‘La Productivite des patorages saheliens’ (Penning de Vries and 
Djiteye) .. we should use graph of cover page he sais .. book about rangelands, but much same for crops. 
adapting to different types of drought .. vary cultivars adapted to spatial and temporal variability drought/rain, 
distribution of rain season 

Question 3. Is there a link between animal, crop and resource research? 

yes there is a clear link: 

(semi-) Arid areas: Camels, goats and sheep, depends a lot on animals, pastoral systems disappear because 
of migration of more people towards their lands, influence of animals, people are not settled, to look for feed, 
spatially scattered, depends on rainfall pattern, water collection more important than soil fertility, they might 
partly settle when they have found depression in land with water, and when they settle they become arable 
farmers, literature on old systems middle east for collecting water 

Sub-humid: cattle, free grazing cattle, store fed cattle, influence of animals lower, animals produce manure .. 
use to fertilize, but there is not enough manure (it is important), when they are free grazing, it is hard to collect 
manure to use for crops, it goes back into grasslands 

what has changed? lack of land, move to drier areas, where they are more vulnerable, get conflicts, nomad 
systems have collapsed. there are these moon shaped wholes in areas with a slope .. water captured, but still 
need nutrients 

Question 4. There is a gap between field and research? 

He never gave a straight answer, but he mainly talked about the ‘no-side’, within WUR work with farmers, 
universities in EU are cooperative, there is long history of strong collaboration, till 80s more top down research, 
beginning 90s till now, research in collaboration mostly, also not so much on experimental fields, but just 
farmers. In his personal opinion: overestimate local knowledge, because people move to drier area and their 
knowledge is of area they moved away from, look more critically at indigenous knowledge. Our job is not 
extension, WUR tries to involve extension workers, knowledge generated in larger programs, communicating 
with NGOs and other organizations 

Question 5. What about the current policies in dryland? 

no idea. depends on your definition of dryland, our definition is too broad. different farming systems have 
different policies. policies: where is funding given too. look at EU policies in dryland. climate change and 
vulnerability most in policies. also look at ICRISAT and ILRI policies, IITA (tropical) 

Question 6. What are the research priorities? 

in agriculture .. water is important 


in arid: collecting water, nutrients also important (it is not precondition, but water is) 

in semi-arid: water management and nutrients 

in Tigray need soil fertility 

Question 7. Is there a need for partnership? 

university is about knowledge and communication, not everybody has to talk with everybody. need key 
partnerships: key centers in EU, key international centers in Africa, and relevant key institutes and large NGO. 
many of large NGO have technical department, don’t forget to talk about NGOs, government is underfunded, so 
NGO has more money to do research. agriculture key part rural development. large NGOs have larger 
importance than government in rural development. CARE (NGO), budget millions, so far more than 
government, Oxfam novib 

Question 8. Do you know any PhD students who might be interesting for us? 

PhD worked on millet in Niger, but most work in higher rainfall areas. soil and water conservation group has 
some PhD students. Ken is now in a group of UNCCD .. make book on degraded land (bit like IPCC idea), 
ICRISAT is leasing it. that document might be open for open consultation. UNCCD is global policy, therefore 
that document might be important, but document is still in embryo-phase. 

 

 

 


Interview with Dr. Ir. Todd Crane 

04-06-2009 

Introduction 

Todd Crane is an American who works now at Wageningen University at the Technology and Agrarian 
Development group. He did his PhD in anthropology (specialization in ecology) with an interest in West-Africa. 
He did a thesis research in Mali, where he looked at local management, and the relations between farmers and 
herders. In his Post-Doc he looked at seasonal climate forecasting in the USA. At the WUR he especially looks 
at climate change adaptation from local perspective in West-Africa. 

Knowledge gap between field and research centers 

Yes there is. He thinks there are two components: a gap for farmers and a gap for researchers. The gap for 
researchers is the technical concept of how manage natural resources and how it really works at the ground. 
Often the development of management techniques misses the social component of resource management, 
which is essential. The gap for the farmers is the poor understanding and lack of technical knowledge. Another 
big issue is the disconnection between the technical possibilities and the institutional processes. 

Land tenure is a social institution, but how does it interact with potential for pasture improvement and rotational 
grazing? They know rotational grazing works, but it is not implemented. 

The research now is often participatory research at local scale. However production does not happen at local 
scale for pastoralists, because that is at land scale level. It does not fit institutional behavior. 

The local knowledge is collected and transferred sometimes, but packaging knowledge is not useful. Better is it 
to use knowledge that is embedded in local institutions. Local knowledge is useful but social institutions are 
also important. Their overall objective is to improve land management, changing behavior and institutions. 

How to narrow the gap 

There should be more participatory research, although that is a broad concept. The idea is to get away from the 
notion that only science can create knowledge. Knowledge production is everywhere, and anyone can do it. 
Within that there are boundaries. Researchers are often judged by publications and how much money they 
bring into company or university. There is no formal reward for own input at ground and that is a problem. 
Researchers want to have an impact on the environmental condition, but they don’t get rewarded for that. They 
might even lose their job for that. 

Another thing is that interdisciplinary is needed, because it has a big potential to work at the ground. You need 
both environmental and social disciplines. 

By blurring the distinction between basic research, applied research and straight up application (e.g. mostly 
NGO) an opportunity arises to work more effective. 

Sometimes farmers do their own research, but it is not legitimized to be used in science. Social sciences push 
research towards participatory research. They are trying to bridge the gap between technical advances and 
applied utilities. 

Current research focus in dryland 

He has only worked in Mali, so his ideas are based on that country. There the biggest issue is land rights, 
because there is an increased encroachment upon water resources and an increased use of land. In the past 
the land tenure systems were in the hand of farmers, during the colonization it was in hands of the government. 
They kept in place the land tenure mostly, but overlaid some. The government owed all non-farmed land. Since 
pastoralists live on ground where no farmers are present, they live on ground of the government. The villages 
of farmers have the right to expand their field, more than the herders have the right to expand their land. The 
country is moving towards decentralization. The herder think the government should stop the farmers taking 
more land. 


The intensification is another big problem. This means for the herders that they are pushed to keep less 
animals on a smaller piece of land. But they don’t want this, because it damages their ethnic identity. For 
farmers it means they are pushed to have animals as well for manure, ploughing etc. They also need to have a 
closer management of a smaller amount of space. But they partly disagree, because it is counter intuitive to be 
able to produce more by farming less. Then also another threat comes: if they farm less, they use less land and 
might lose this land. It are both the national government as the international world who are pushing towards 
intensification, because they want to reduce the pressure on the environment. 

Also climate change is a pressure to stop extensive farming and herding. The Sahel is at forefront of climate 
change variability. It is very important is research. But for the people it does not matter whether it is climate 
variability or climate change. The concerns for drought are severe and well-based. 

Priorities of farmers 

The herders don’t want to be forced to farm. For farmers the food security is the main focus. Also education 
and health are important, but the role of research in this is debatable. Both farmers and herders try to practice 
pressure on politics for the other to give up land. Farmers are increasingly strong due to decentralization which 
gives them more rights. On the other hand, the herders can be quite powerful as well, since some families are 
very wealthy. Since some of them have a lot of money they can bribe political peoples. 

The farmers have an interest in cash crops (watermelons, maize), and are less interested in millet and 
sorghum. They think a chemical fertilizer is no replacement for manure, due to the problems of burning and not 
increasing the soil fertility. 

African-European partnership 

Capacity building is an important issue. The increase of African research is most impactful. 


Interview with Chris Reij 

03-06-2009 

Introduction 

Mr. Reij is a human geographer, and he’s worked in the Sahel region since 1979. He’s also has extensive 
experience in Ethiopia. As the Sahel was characterized by droughts in the 1970s and 1980s his focus shifted: 
less human geographer, more soil and water conservation (SWC) specialist. 

He thinks people are too pessimistic about the drylands. Firstly, because the investments that have been made 
by farmers are underappreciated by experts. Examples are the widespread adoption of Zais (improved planting 
holes) in Burkina Faso and Niger, and the reforestation of the Zinder region in Niger. When these investments 
are analyzed, usually the ex-ante expectations of their impact on yield are taken into account. According to Mr. 
Reij it’s also necessary to take into account the ex-post secondary benefits; These benefits include a positive 
impact on climate and water tables (rising 4-5m), trees around the fields grow faster and yield more fruit, and 
youth does not need to migrate out of the village. Secondly, people incorrectly assumed that SWC measures 
only have a positive impact on medium- to long-term incomes. When water is retained, this has an immediate 
impact on yields. So SWC has a positive effect on short-term income. 

Some trends that have been missed are increasing tree growth in Niger, and improvements in soil and water 
conservation in Ethiopia. 

Dryland issues 

The investments that have been made have not been identified. 

Long-term trends are not taken into account. Things aren’t going well in the Sahel, but they are not nearly as 
bad as twenty-thirty years ago. 

Successes need to be identified, and then scaled up/spread to other areas. 

Role of research 

International Agricultural Research Centres (e.g. ICRISAT) focus a lot on fundamental research. If you don’t do 
fundamental research, chances of being published are lower, and this hampers a researcher’s career. This is 
also a problem for the national institutes. Apart from that, these National Institutes are simply underfunded as 
well. Good researchers leave as soon as they can. 

What these research institute could do, is to engage more in adaptive breeding; finding crops that are well-
suited to local conditions. 

Another good option would be to put more focus on identifying farmer-innovators. These cab be very crucial 
when it comes to creating sustainable innovations. He mentioned a farmer in Burkina Faso that played a huge 
role in the introduction of the Zai, by creating a self-organized private extension service. 

Gap between field and research 

In some cases. It is very attractive for researchers to do on-station research, and not bother with farmers too 
much, as they’re primarily interested in publications. So the links between research and field aren’t as close as 
they could be. 

Also gaps exist between IARCs and NARCs. NARCs hardly use the varieties from IARCs in their programs. 

 

How to narrow the gap? 

Give researchers an incentive to interact with farmers. So less focus should be put on being published. 


A second thing that needs to be done is to change the attitude of researchers; they should treat farmers more 
like equals; people they can learn from. 

How to spread knowledge/innovations from one place to another? 

Mr. Reij’s answer was simple and short: Farmers in a bus. In other words, don’t get the innovation to the 
farmer, but the farmer to the innovation. If that’s a field of a farmer-innovator, or a research station doesn’t 
matter. 

A second way would be to employ mass-media. Every farmer has a radio, so that can be used. 

Extensionists can act as facilitators in this process. But they are generally underfunded, and focus on cash crop 
production, not on smallholder subsistence agriculture. NGOs have a role to play as a substitute for national 
extension services, and have done so occasionally. 

Partnership 

According to Mr. Reij, a partnership should not be large. Smaller partnerships are preferable. Also, not between 
institutions, but between individual researchers, to ensure good researchers participate. 

Farmers do not necessarily need to be included. They only should be in if research is to be demand-driven. 
Researchers should visit farms, but if the main task is e.g. to quantify secondary benefits, they do not need to in 
the partnership, as it’s not a demand driven research topic. 

Comments on the Millennium Villages and Sasakawa-Global 2000 (SG2000) 

MV targets just one village, so that’s a): unrealistic, you’re never going to scale it up, unless you’ve got massive 
funds. b) it’s a good way to create social tension, as the villages next door will become jealous of the MV. The 
SG2000 proposes one solution to many local problems, this is not good. 

Researchers do not come up with innovations he says, farmers do. Researchers should validate these farmer 
initiatives. 

Examples of good innovations are Agro-forestry in Niger, and SWC in Burkina Faso. 


Interview with Han van Dijk 

05-06-2009 

Introduction 

Trained as forestry engineer and anthropologist, did research in Mali, how pastoralist dealt with the 1970s 
drought. Also did large study on the impact of climate change on local level for the whole of West-Africa, but 
climate variability turned out to be a bigger problem. Look at politically instability as extra factor, in Chad. 

Agricultural research is very much focused on an idea that you control the environment to manipulate them to 
produce food. But in drylands you do not have this control, especially with rainfall. This is also why research 
had not invested much in the dryland cropping because they consider it too difficult. Or it is like in the US about 
large scale farming. 

There are a number of studies where people specifically tried to find out more about dryland farming. Many 
factors (like, soil moisture and fertility, farmer capacities and health, rainfall, birds, pests, locust plagues) make 
the highly variable yield, even within a village in the same conditions. (We know very little about this but the 
farmers know maybe more.) Difficult to integrate this in research. 

Researchers are more interested in better controlled environment .. high productive areas. While food security 
is higher in dryland areas. So researches are more south where productivity of the land is higher, and in the 
area where the food security problems are the highest there is the lowest density of agricultural research. Also 
gives economic boast. 

In Niamee was a research institute of ICRISAT did a systematic study about cropping methods, with hedges, 
trees, etc. To see which system would yield the highest productivity and what kind of factors were the cause of 
variation. Only significant determining factor turned out to be rainfall. 

NGOs do their own research, they try out different crop varieties and technologies, work parallel wit researches, 
not together. Not much communication between them. 

All kind of government services, infrastructure, is very weak, almost absent in dryland areas. This makes it 
difficult to have information from the field. EWS data is collected by civil service who have no knowledge on 
agriculture, and don’t know how to interpret it. 

Up to 1995 most research was oriented at biological production systems, these said, they are doing the wrong 
tins: they overstock. Researchers didn’t take the variability into account. An focused on caring capacity. From 
this destocking policies came, but that would mean that about 80% of the people should stop livestock keeping. 
These studies also said that this way of livestock keeping would damage the ecosystem. Is not true, ecosystem 
recovers after drought. 

Rain fluctuates and desert moves up south and up north again. 

In 1980s ploughs were introduced and allowed farmers to go more up north to cultivate land. They could take 
the risk because they had a larger area. So farming expands into pastoral areas .. conflicts. 

Research should study how local farmers farm. How do they deal with rainfall variability? What do they do if the 
rain is very late, do they go to the city or work with livestock? 

Researchers need to be present in those areas. Even if the government says researchers to do something, the 
attitude might still be like that this is not interesting, it is so variable we cant understand it. For example the 
WARDA investigated in Mali in flood rice cultivating in Niger area. After 3 years time they said we cant handle 
this variability and the building was closed. The attitude of researchers is very important, but they said we cant 
control the flood. While rice is their major crop, people prefer this local rice, and worth more money on the 
market. 1,5-2 million people live there 

Researchers say it is impossible to cultivate millet at the border with Mali, in 200mm rainfall area. But those 
people do, and we engineers can’t, so farmers are more performent than we are. 


So lets study what they do. And then we can maybe find ways of introducing more drought resistant crop into 
this systems. And test if drought resistant crops in one area will also grow in a area with higher rainfall, but 
other difficulties. And the are also more disease resistant millet varieties, but nobody is interested because thee 
is no commercial interest. 

Drought and pest resistant have most priority for farmers. Economics are saying that there is soil degradation. 
But there is also a risk in high soil fertility, crop failure is also high. Because if there is good rain too so you 
produce a lot of biomass. But if there is an inter-seasonal drought, this big crop needs much more water than a 
small crop. So where crops are growing very well, they are more susceptible to drought. So this cut off point 
between soil fertility and rainfall and the risk involved in rainfall variability is an very important thing to study. 
And often farmers manipulate soil fertility, from a study in Niger, they throw all the manure on one part of the 
field and the other part they don’t. then they sow their crop, and when the rainfall is high they harvest here, 
when the rainfall is low, they harvest less, but they harvest there. But if you do all of it with manure and you 
improve soil fertility then you maybe don’t have a harvest at all. Farmers are very skilled in manipulating these, 
and we don’t know how they do it. We know a little but we need to expand this basis of knowledge. 

Governments have cut back budgets for research, so research should be left to the market. But that means that 
only market parties that have capital can demand research. But farmers are not he ones with capital to demand 
for research. So we need to invest again in public funding for research. If you look at the world scale, private 
companies invest maybe ten times as much in agricultural research than public agencies like government or 
international community. But if you have indeed public funding this should create partnerships with NGOs 
working all over the place which have good contacts with farmers. This can be a basis to acquire again a basis 
in the country side in dryland. From the donor countries much more emphasis should be in these marginal 
areas. Its easier in already high productive areas, they have to show to donors that they reduce poverty, in 
dryland it takes much longer and more effort. But if you look at poverty and human suffering dryland should be 
priority. Because 80% in these areas lives below poverty line. Therefore re-orient you development strategy to 
these areas. But most donors, governments NGOs consider these areas as to difficult. 

The change could start at the level of the Dutch government or the FAO. 

A lot of money has invested already but probably with the wrong assumptions, that indeed you can improve 
agriculture by soil fertility (also risk) instead of drought resistance. But the right strategy has not been thought 
out yet. 

Its hard to work for students in Niger, language problem, no infrastructure to house students there, to help 
student there, no supervision. So if there is no research station to support you there, then how to do it. 


Interview with Dr. Ir. Jan de Graaff 

11-06-2009 

Introduction 

Professor at the Land Degradation and Development department of Wageningen University and Research 
Center. 

participatory approaches 

Mr. De Graaff thinks participatory approaches are useful to identify issues for research. In the past, the CGIAR 
institutes often did not work as coherently. CIMMYT would make a new variety, but that could conflict with the 
crops another institute developed. ISNAR institute was created for this, but it was dissolved after fifteen years, 
in 2004. 

The work to strengthen “research-extension” linkages has continued (e.g. the world bank supported training 
and visit program), but often good results were lost due to lack of funds. 

researcher attitude 

Often farmers and researcher don’t connect too well. Farmers can look up to researchers, and not tell them 
everything they know. The risk is the researcher tells a lot of stuff, and the farmer continues doing whatever he 
was doing as soon as the researcher leaves. 

need for harmonization 

Does Ethiopian policy on land tenure conflict with SWC priorities? 

Land tenure policy is certainly a big issue affecting investments. Since the Derg, several land reforms have 
been performed; generating insecurity about any claims to the future income flows resulting from presents 
investments. This means that farmers are unwilling to e.g. build terraces on their land. 

important issues 

The inheritance system matters: in some countries land is divided between all sons, creating small farms that 
are not viable. 

In areas where wood is scarce, manure is used as fuel, not as fertilizer. Agro-forestry could help here, but if 
there aren’t any trees at all, and livestock east whatever grows, this is hard to realize. 

Per hectare yields are dropping in Ethiopia. 

How to scale up success stories? 

In Burkina Faso stone bunds were successfully reproduced all over the country. They were adopted first in one 
region, and through the help of NGOs spread to a wider area. The role of researchers remained unclear; NGOs 
do employ researchers that do good work. Local universities should focus more on their home region. Mr. De 
Graaff mentioned the example of the US, where each state has its own university, the agricultural departments 
of which strongly contribute to the development of local agriculture. 

Is there need for partnerships between European and African universities 

These partnerships already exist; Wageningen used to have support points on every continent, but has 
replaced this strategy. They now sign 4 year long partnerships with foreign universities in which PhD students 
are trained. e.g. the RESPONSE program with Mekele university, or a program in Benin for which the 
graduation ceremony even took place in Benin, with Wageningen’s rector attending. According to Mr. De Graaff 
it is not really needed to expand this policy to a EU level, he does not see much added value. 


Farmers mostly care about short term profitability. Some SWC measures combine short-term impact with long-
term impacts. The stone bunds in BF are a good example; the farmers liked them because they improve water 
retention, increasing yields from season , but they also help increase soil fertility, which has a positive long term 
impact. 


Interview with Wim Goris of Agri-ProFocus 

03-06-2009 

Introduction 

Agri-Pro Focus the word is derived from focus on agriculture producers. We are Dutch platform or partnership 
for agriculture development and agriculture all members do work with agriculture development, our current 
strategic plan focus on framer entrepreneurship, which implies self organization as farmers need to bulk their 
produce in order to get market power: our activities in three areas value chain developments, access to 
financial and services and product and sustainable food production the later had to do with link with food 
security and the livelihoods. Respect for gender balance is a key criterion for all three themes, also because not 
all farmers can take risk against market exposure. 

Agri-Pro Focus responded to the recent there strong call form Accra Agenda and the Dutch Minster for 
Development Cooperation- for more collaboration and less segregation among development cooperation actors 
By providing a network for joint action and learning. 

People who produce for the market and who they don’t are in our focus, We believe that every body produce 
for the market and every body is under influence of the market even if you produce for himself 

Agri-ProFocus partnership stands for new ventures, new dynamics and for organizing development cooperation 
beyond the boundaries of individual . We were established 4 years ago, there was need felt of organizing the 
support to agriculture and agricultural organizations as it suffered from marginalization if you look at the political 
agenda. 

Examples of joint projects 

Dairy production support in India 

Wim Goris gave the example of Agriterra (which provides capacity building and technical support but no 
finances) cooperating with Oiko credit to provide the financial investment (for a milk cooling installation). 

Learning cluster in Ethiopia 

Five Dutch NGOs and two Ethiopian NGOs have organized a three year joint learning program for 17 producer 
organizations (farmer representatives) and 10 of their service providers. Workshops (discussing financial 
services, how to relate with other chain actors etc), coaching visits by experts, assignments and an end contest 
(real business proposal) enable the participants to improve their entrepreneurial skills, market-oriented 
production and quality assurance. 

Pastoralism in Ethiopia 

Dutch NGO Cordaid is working on Disaster Risk Reduction in Southern Ethiopia, teaching pastoralist how to 
adapt to climate change. Cordaid approached Agri-ProFocus to work together on the marketing of livestock. 
However, Agri-ProFocus also knows researchers from Van Hall Larenstein (Robert Baas) who have data that 
would challenge Cordaid assumptions about pastoralism. Bringing NGOs and researchers together could test 
the assumptions that the NGOs have. 

Gap between field and research 

Action research on pro poor dev of value chains, implemented by LEI (Sietze Wellema, Gerdien Meierink). Lot 
of research, but do not see impact on smallholder income. How to include smallholders into value chains? 
Need to choose specific chain, works well in Uganda and Ethiopia, choose sesame (Northern Ethiopia). Also 
introduced the concept of contract farming, not known yet in Ethiopia. 

People from Wageningen UR are very open to relate their research to practitioners. 

Farmer Field Schools 


Contact Arnoud Braun, he is the coordinator of farmer field school (digital) network. 

Partnership 

The partnership got started thanks to political leverage to address fragmentation and call (from the Dutch 
Ministry of Dev. Coop.) for more coordination. 

Agri-ProFocus started building its network by arranging expert meetings, trying to establish a community of 
professionals. These activities link people from different organizations working on the same topic and/or 
country. Joint projects brings the partnership a level deeper (see examples).The support office also runs a 
question and answer service. It also directs questions from private companies to relevant NGOs. 

Partnerships used to be very top down, WUR working with foreign university, they work with producers. Dutch 
NGOs are the intermediaries between farmer organizations and donors, because farmer organizations do not 
have the skills to conform to the requirements of donors. In order to strengthen the farmer organizations, the 
NGOs should first be cooperating better. More coordination between all organizations supporting farmer 
organization (incl. Ethiopian government and their many extension workers) is needed for the future. Perhaps 
also by arranging expert meetings (in Ethiopia). 

Agri-ProFocus started by strengthening cooperation between Dutch NGOs. They also want to increase 
cooperation between farmer organizations in developing countries. 

Researchers can provide the argumentation and proof why policies should be reconsidered. For instance, the 
Ethiopian government leases the best lands to foreign investors (Chinese, Saudi, biofuels) while these lands 
are crucial to pastoralist, especially in times of severe drought. 

Partnership with the private sector 

Private partners might not care to much on which country, they focus on specific products. Working in value 
chains makes you focus on product first. Private partners focus on median and large farmers, near the capital, 
near roads. Whereas development workers start with selecting the poorest, those who lack access to credit and 
market opportunities. 

When people are in an environment that does not support market opportunities you focus on sustainable food 
production, for own consumption, off farm income opportunities, food for work and social safety nets. This 
requires a very different network, you approach the Relief Department in stead of the entrepreneurship 
department of an NGO. 

Agri-ProFocus started with a focus on bulking farmers’ produce to strengthen their position and proportion of 
the value chain. But a value chain approach will not work for all farmers because for instance for some the 
transport costs would be too high therefore it would not be a useful investment. They are starting a discussion 
on how to link food aid and market production, because after a few months of food-for-work farmers are 
supposed to produce for the market again. 

Advice on partnerships 

CTA should become a member of Agri-ProFocus. 

Focus on specific countries. Get an overview of who is doing what in Ethiopia, the Agri-ProFocus report on this 
will be ready in August. Connect needs and offers from Dutch members. To do this workshops will be held in 
Ethiopia and farmer representatives will be present to respond to the suggestions and assumptions of policies. 
In this way actors like NGOs and researchers can be open and check their own assumptions. Provide an 
environment to focus on Ethiopian farmers. Look for people (within NGOs) who do not just want to follow their 
own routine, get something new started. 

Similar to Dutch hospitals, everything used to be organized around the agenda of the doctor. This has changed 
to a focus around the patient, the doctors work together around the patient. 


What is needed is a reconfiguration around the farmers entrepreneurs. Reorganize how we work together 
(Dutch NGOs and all actors in Ethiopia) in the enabling environment around the farmer (practitioner). Bring 
everyone together and have an open dialogue of what works and what to abandon. Those who give a lot in the 
partnership get more results. 

Interesting document on partnership: ‘Building North South Partnership for a better world’ Katrien Termeer, 
Joost Oorthuizen en Thea Hilhorst) available online. 


Interview with Prof. Dr. Ir. Akke van der Zijpp 

25-05-2009 

Introduction 

Professor at the Animal Production Systems department of Wageningen University and Research Centre. 


Most important dryland issues/problems 

Climate change > vegetation change > change in livestock, move from cattle to sheep, goats and camels. 
Crops (Ethiopia) move from teff and maize to sorghum and millet. Strategic conservation of water. 

Consumer demand pushing changes, biofuels can be option. 

Success story 

Example of Hedges in Burkina Faso (5 years to grow) subdivision of plots 

Bushes: water binding capacity and compost, manure utilization due to root system. 

Livestock kept out, contained around the house, collect manure. 

 Many implements, even tractors so much funding 

Need market to buy trees, not yet developed in Eth. 

In Eth farms too small, do not want to plant trees. 

Lack of resources. 

Different people might adopt hedges, better educated might leave to go to the city. 

SILLS or CILLS (in French) 

IDRC Canada (in Ethiopia) building ponds, but drowning of children and animals 

Dams (Ethiopia) build by food for work. Cabbages, all grow same crop, market overload. 

Need market at reasonable distance. 

Well-off farmers bought pump and grew on collective land, were told to stop 

Much livestock brought to reservoir> manure> algae 

Need regulation 

Gap farm – research 

In Ethiopia farmers rely on info from Agricultural Bureau extension workers, many were trained. Farmers often 
over 50, illiterate depend on oral communication, radio, information centres with tv and demonstration plots. 

Adoption is inherent to household factors: labour, resources (land, capital), long term interest in farming or in 
something else (migration)? 

Access to credit. 

Ethiopian farmer cooperatives are important but too much government controlled. 

ILRI: basic research on research opportunities. Identify different groups, choose poorest. Identify problems in 
values chains to address. Poverty in relation to livestock kept. Work together with farmers associations. 


Build road so now can produce dairy, than need fodder for animals, do you grow alfalfa or is crop residue 
enough. 

Priority should be: roads, look for markets that can be developed, near expanding cities. 

Research policy setting: 

Ethiopian governments’ priority: Intensification, Dairy, Beef, Sheep 

Top down, export oriented 

Focus on east (sheep) and west (beef to Khartoum). Trading system difficult, not clear on quality requirements, 
farmers want to sell old traction animals. 

Should focus more on local markets, local quality requirements less costly. 

Behind governments: policy of international institutions. 1995-2005 poverty reduction policy based on economic 
improvement. Written by consultants not by countrymen, not accepted, not known. 

Gates Foundation: likes value chain, focus on income generating activities, pay for school, health care. Fund 
NGOs with particular expertise. Invest in local knowledge. Very strong on evaluation. 

Land rights 

Need access to land, hiring impedes investment. Many people (kenia) put up fences, leftovers for migrating 
livestock in exchange for manure, now kept out: conflict. Overgrazing: herd size not reduced because of bank 
function. Fenced land also suffers from degradation around. 

Government wants to plant trees, keep livestock out. Check FAO environmental services. 

Relation between crop research and animal research 

Test for drought resistance 

Government was not producing seeds for animal fodder, sudden demand for this 

In Kenya intensification led to animal diseases 

During Green Revolution rice was selected on basis of nr of grains, but it is the residue that is important for 
animal fodder. You can find in gene bank types that have many grains plus good energy protein residue for 
fodder. 

More consumer demand for dairy and meat so producing good feed is now important. 

Specific interventions for animals: veterinary services in Ethiopia 

In Ethiopia the veterinary school in Debraseit is expanding, but still shortage of veterinarians. Also vaccine 
production unit in Debraseit, so good facilities in Ethiopia. But service in the field is limited. 

 


